David, I cannot believe we're about to
do a 4-hour podcast on syrup, sugar, and
water. I mean, that's the entire
business is just syrup, sugar, and water
combined. And it's a $300 billion
company.
>> Well, Ben, you know what I'm going to
say to you in response to that? Do you
want to sell sugar, water for the rest
of your life, or do you want to come
with me and [music] change the world?
>> Oo, save it, David. Save it.
>> Who got the truth?
Is it you? [music] Is it you? Is it you?
Who got the truth now?
[music] Is it you? Is it you? Is it you?
Sitt down. Say it straight.
>> Welcome [music] to the fall 2025 season
of Acquired, the podcast about great
companies and the stories and playbooks
behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert.
>> I'm David Rosenthal.
>> And we are your hosts. Charlie Mer has a
famous thought experiment. It's the
1880s. You want to build a company from
scratch that eventually becomes worth $2
trillion starting with just 2 million.
So you're looking for a 1 millionx
return or as Charlie puts it a La Palooa
outcome.
>> Of course he does.
>> Very Charlie.
>> The constraint is it must be a
non-alcoholic beverage business.
>> Okay.
>> And another constraint, it must throw
off many billions of dollars in
dividends along the way to your
shareholders.
>> Okay. This sounds almost impossible, but
what ideas could you possibly dream up
to give it your best shot?
>> Well, I think the first question I would
have is whether I could include any now
illegal drugs in my product. [laughter]
That certainly helps. So, to build this
giant valuable company, the first thing
you need to know is you're not going to
get there with something generic. So you
have to build a brand that grows into a
strong protected trademark. And to reach
that scale, it must be global. So it has
to have a taste that's universal in all
countries. Now, conveniently for you,
all humans do require large amounts of
water every day to live. So it is a
giant market. [laughter]
>> Yes, but you're not going to fully
replace water. It's just going to be
kind of a small fraction of the time.
So, onto the beverage itself, you're
going to want to optimize it to maximize
the rewards of ingesting it as
refreshing as possible in any climate.
Now, you're going to want to do a bunch
of other stuff, too. You want to fill it
with calories to give energy. You want
the flavor, texture, and aroma that
makes it pleasurable to consume. And,
uh, you should throw in some brain
stimulants like caffeine and sugar.
That's sort of the ideal product mix
>> among other things. Yeah. Now, you don't
want competitors to swoop in for a free
ride on the market you just created. So,
you should make sure your product, the
real thing, is available everywhere,
anytime someone asks for it.
>> I see what you did there.
>> At a very low price. So, there's really
not an opportunity for competitors to
ever fill the vacuum. There's never a
reason for anyone to reach for anything
other than your product.
>> Always.
>> Always, David. [laughter] And since
everyone is not thinking about beverages
all the time, like you probably are as
the proprietor of this business, you're
going to want to associate your beverage
with all the things that they are
thinking about. The good life, family,
your sports heroes, beautiful people,
Christmas, I mean, happiness generally.
You are going to want to have a
Pavlovian association between your drink
and happiness. and you're going to want
to spend huge amounts of money
blanketing the entire world with this
messaging. Now, to build something this
valuable, you also can't have a big
expensive bottling and distribution
operation. So, you're going to need to
figure out some clever way to get
someone else's capital and employees for
that while still maintaining the control
that your brand requires. I mean,
ideally, it would be great if you could
serve the entire world with just a few
of your own production facilities.
>> That would be pretty great.
>> Yes. And the last thing, you must never
under any circumstances change the
formula or flavor.
[laughter]
>> We were doing great there.
>> We were doing great.
>> But you know, this might be why
Coca-Cola is not a two trillion dollar
company today.
>> Well, we'll debate that at the end of
the episode. listeners. Of course, this
playbook is almost exactly what the
Coca-Cola Company has done, and they've
done it over the course of
140 years. It has its roots all the way
back in the Civil War. It grew up
through the rise of the automobile,
through the Great Depression, through
two world wars. It seamlessly and
shamelessly integrated into the hippie
culture of the 70s, and then of course,
it had the epic cola wars of the 80s and
onward. And David, I would say this
episode perhaps more than any other that
we've covered is about America.
>> Well, it's about America and then
America inserting itself everywhere else
in the rest of the world. Can't wait to
dive into it. Well, listeners, this
episode was selected by you. Last month,
we asked our email subscribers to vote
on what company we should cover next,
and Coca-Cola was the overwhelming
favorite. So, thank you to all of you
who participated. You can join that
email list at acquired.fm/e fm/e to get
in on the next round of voting. And that
same email list is getting a lot better.
We just did a big overhaul. So each
monthly email will now have episode
summaries, our big takeaways from the
company after studying it, and exclusive
photos from our research process. So
never miss an episode drop by signing up
at acquired.fm/e
or clicking the link in the show notes.
So with that, this show is not
investment advice. David and I may have
investments in the companies we discuss
and this show is forformational and
entertainment purposes only. David,
where do we start our story? [laughter]
>> Well, Ben, as you so aptly set up there,
the story of the birth of Coca-Cola
starts arguably with the birth of
America as we know it today in a newly
reunified
United States of America following the
Civil War. Mark Pendergrass in his great
book for God, Country, and Coca-Cola
that was a main source for this episode
has a great quote. He says, "Coca-Cola
remains emblematic of the best and worst
of America. It is a microcosm of
American history. Coca-Cola grew up with
the country, shaping and shaped by the
times. The drink helped to alter not
only consumption patterns, but attitudes
towards leisure, work, advertising, sex,
family, life, and patriotism. you know,
just a few small things. So, if you
remember back to our standard oil series
a couple years ago, one of the biggest
industries in post civil war America was
oil of a certain kind, but it wasn't the
same kind of oil as standard oil. It was
snake oil. [laughter]
Ah, good hook.
>> Yeah. Or as it came to be known after
the war, patent medicines. Before this
industry, there were no national brands
in America or anywhere else. There were
railroads and there were like big
national industrial companies, but there
weren't any national consumer product
companies. Everything was local. There
weren't any CPG companies. There weren't
any supermarkets. There weren't any car
companies. There weren't gas stations.
>> And there weren't advertising agencies
to go along with them. Patent medicines
were sort of like this seed crystal that
created the modern American consumer
business.
>> And what were patent medicines?
>> So going back again to our Standard Oil
series, John D. Rockefeller's dad, if
you remember, was a traveling snake oil
salesman. [laughter]
>> Yeah. In his days, back before the Civil
War, these were medicines that promised
like a cure to all sorts of ailments.
Nausea, indigestion, headaches, cancer,
tuberculosis, skull fractures,
paralysis, and impetence.
>> All based on zero research, zero
studies,
>> zero science, nothing. The Civil War
changed all that. Not necessarily for
the better. [laughter]
So after the war, there were so many
wounded soldiers in America that were in
such chronic pain that the market for
medicines like this from these snake oil
salesmen just exploded. A huge [snorts]
huge percentage of veterans from the
Civil War developed what is called army
disease, quote unquote, i.e. They were
addicted to morphine for the rest of
their lives as a painkiller,
>> which actually did work.
>> Yes, that actually did work
>> very well [laughter]
>> at killing pain. And it wasn't just
physical injuries from the war and the
soldiers who fought in it. The Civil War
ripped America apart. I mean, these guys
and their families had just gone through
this devastating trauma. I mean, there
were so many deaths, so many wounded. It
was families fighting against one
another. It was truly, arguably the
worst moment in our nation's history.
Yeah.
>> So naturally, whenever there's a uh big
problem, American capitalism sees a big
opportunity. So some of these
enterprising traveling snake oil
salesmen started scaling up the
medicines that they were making to meet
all this new demand. And as they scale
up and they start to standardize the
products that they are offering, this
industry comes to be known as patent
medicines. Now most of these medicines
were not actually patented but as the
producer of them you wanted customers
and wouldbe competitors to think that
they were that there was some sort of
barrier to entry. Yes. So pretty quickly
these newly scaling patent medicine guys
discover that the best way to reinforce
that message with consumers and to
stimulate demand was advertising
especially in newspapers. And this is
the birth of the advertising industry in
America.
>> Really,
>> it's these patent medicines that start
spending the first real scale dollars in
newspapers which are also coming up and
industrializing post civil war and
building the business model of the media
industry as we know it today. Because
just like you were talking about in your
great Charlie thought experiment from
the intro, what are these patent
medicines? It's just commodities. It's
like leaves and like nuts and water and
stuff that go into these things. I mean,
it's extract extracts, right? Okay.
>> It's super cheap commodities that are
very easy to obtain in great quantities,
very easy to then produce into your
product and transform and then pretty
small relative to other products, easy
to transport around the country. You do
start to get some of these patent
medicines that scale up and build early
national brands in this day.
>> So you might think that all this is like
ancient history.
>> A whole bunch of products that we still
buy today started as patent medicines.
Luden's cough drops, [clears throat]
>> Vix Vapor Rub, Vaseline, Listerine, the
mouthwatch, all patent medicines. Those
are patent medicines that are still used
for sort of a uh you know health purpose
today. Plenty of products that we still
use and consume today started as patent
medicines but are no longer marketed as
medicines. Graham crackers started as a
patent medicine.
>> Really?
>> Grape nuts. The cereal
>> neither grape nor nuts.
>> Angustera bitters. You know the bitters
that you get like old fashions and
stuff. That was a patent medicine.
>> Okay, that makes sense. That's squarely
what I believe a patent medicine is.
>> Yep. And then a couple things you might
be familiar with. Dr. Pepper. Really? I
didn't know Dr. Pepper was that old.
>> Yeah, Dr. Pepper predates Coca-Cola.
>> Huh?
>> And of course, Coca-Cola
started just the same way as a patent
medicine. Which brings us to Dr. John
Peton, a Confederate War veteran who had
not only been stabbed, he had also been
shot during the war and got army disease
just like all these other soldiers and
was addicted to morphine for the rest of
his life. So after the war he moves to
Atlanta and as part of his sort of
entrepreneurial aspirations in this new
patent medicine consumer economy and
also to probably solve his own problem
he starts casting about for other drugs
that could cure him and others of army
disease. And that is how in the mid
1880s he learns about a new miracle drug
sweeping America
promising to cure all ills including
army disease. Cocaine. [laughter]
Cocaine was really really in in America
in the 1880s. Perhaps foreshadowing a
little bit the 1980s in America as we
will get to later in the episode. Except
in the 1880s, it's really legal and
really broadly encouraged. Certainly,
there's no FDA or anything to make it
illegal, but society's posture toward
cocaine wasn't bad.
>> It was like caffeine today,
>> right? They did not really discover the
addictive nature of it or demonize the
addictive nature of it yet.
>> Yep. Or the side effects, etc., etc. So
pretty quickly, cocaine becomes the most
popular patent medicine ingredient out
there.
>> It's probably the only ingredient that
actually did anything.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And there is a product
on the market, an imported product from
France. You can't make this up. That
quickly becomes the most popular
delivery vehicle for cocaine. A cocaine
fortified wine from Bordeaux in France
called Vin Marani. It's like the most
extreme forloo you could ever dream of.
>> Exactly. Exactly. [laughter]
Yes.
So this sounds utterly ridiculous today,
but let me read you the list of public
endorsers of Vin Mariani, the like
testimonies in the Rolex Parliament.
Thomas Edison,
Buffalo Bill Cody, United States
President William McKinley gets even
better. Queen Victoria of England, and
not one but three consecutive popes in
the Vatican, all swore by Vin Marani.
>> Feels like a thing I would be swearing
by and endorsing, too. I imagine once
you start, it's the best thing ever. So
entrepreneurial Peton in Atlanta sees
Vin Marani's success and is like well I
wonder if there's a way that I could
copy and improve on that. And the way he
comes up to improve upon it is to add
caffeine to the mix.
>> Why not?
>> Yeah, why not? He decides that he's
going to get the caffeine from African
cola nuts. K O L A. cola nuts,
>> which we should say is the first
introduction of the word cola period in
the American lexicon. Cola drinks were
not a thing.
>> Yep. And it's very bitter. But the
reason he chooses it is it has an even
greater caffeine concentration than
coffee beans. [laughter] He really wants
this product to work. So Peton starts
selling Peton's French wine cocoa, which
is still wine, but is now infused both
with cocoa leaves for the cocaine and
cola nuts for the caffeine. And it's a
hit.
>> This could not have tasted good.
>> No, I can't imagine what it tasted like.
President Ulissiz Srant becomes a fan
and Peton starts selling like thousands
and thousands of bottles in and around
Atlanta,
>> which makes sense. People are drinking
it for its drug-like medicinal
qualities, not that it's in any way
refreshing.
>> Yep. Now, I say bottles, keep that in
mind here. Bottling technology in the
1880s is not what it is today. not very
good at preserving liquids or foods.
Certainly not good at preserving
carbonation.
However, because this is a wine at this
point in time, wine has natural
preservatives in it. So, it's
self-stable. So, you can sell bottles of
wine. People have been selling bottles
of wine for centuries at this point in
time.
>> So, then prohibition hits. Party's over.
>> Yep. Fall of 1885, Atlanta, I think,
might have been the first major city in
America that institutes prohibition and
becomes a dry town, no alcohol. So
Pepperton's now like, "Well, shoot. I've
got this hit product. I need to scramble
and come up with a soft version of a
soft drink."
>> And this is the origin of soft drinks.
They're not hard as in alcoholic drinks.
They're soft. There you go. So he starts
madly experimenting with all sorts of
flavors and ingredients. And after 6
months or so in April of 1886, he nails
a formula.
>> Yes. And so the question is, how does he
arrive at this formula? The book I was
reading, which is called Secret Formula,
a great book on the history of Coca-Cola
that had access to all the corporate
archives, really describes Peton in this
phase as finding his capitalist streak,
as sort of realizing, okay, take a step
back. Patent medicines are sold for 75
cents, a dollar. It serves a crowd of
people when they're looking to recover
from some ailment or really at this
point probably serve an addiction.
>> We're now 20 years from the Civil War,
so a new generation is coming up.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. That doesn't have army disease. Is
there a product that I can make that
people can afford anytime they want
that's not a medicine that's just a
refreshment and has all these other
great properties using some of the
ingredients that we've been using. So he
kind of comes up with this idea of a
five cent again because the ingredients
cost so little these extracts it's a
super high margin product a five- cent
thing that anybody can have just to have
a little pickme up a little treat when
they're at the soda fountain.
>> Pick me up. [laughter]
when they're sitting down in the social
gathering space because drugstores at
that time were sort of the Starbucks of
this time. It really was this gathering
place to go and spend time. And so he
says, "I'm going to serve this other
market of anytime refreshment." And so
he's playing around with these
ingredients and he's got the cola seed
that's got this natural caffeine in it.
Fun story, in the original Coca-Cola,
for the first, I don't know, a couple
decades, it actually had four times the
amount of caffeine that Coke does today.
Okay, so it's effectively an energy
drink, even leaving the cocaine aside.
However, the cola seed, it tastes really
bitter. It's absolutely horrible, which
was not a big deal previously cuz he was
mixing it with wine. People were
drinking it for medicinal purposes, just
kind of slugging it down. But he's
trying to create a refreshing beverage
here. And so, I did not know that this
was possible way back in 1886. But what
he does is he uses synthetic caffeine.
Merc, the pharmaceutical company, had
already been extracting pure caffeine
from cola seeds. So Peton just got a
hold of Merc and bought a bunch of the
powder. And so the first version of
Coca-Cola is a little tiny bit of the
cola seed just kind of to say that it's
in there. He's going to call this thing
Coca-Cola, but the caffeine actually
comes from a synthetic extract.
>> Yeah. Interesting. It's always been
synthetic. Huh.
>> That's right.
>> I didn't know that. That's amazing. So,
it's a great excerpt from the book
Secret Formula. At last, he stood on the
verge of inventing Coca-Cola. Down in
the basement, Peton filled his 40-gallon
kettle with plain water, which he then
heated to a boil over an open fire.
Using a wooden paddle to stir the
solution, he melted in sugar and
caffeine.
>> Right. Sugar because of the extreme
bitterness of the colonut.
>> Yes. And actually, the cocoa plant was
also bitter, so sugar was to offset it.
>> Yeah. Yeah. [laughter]
Next, he added caramel for coloring,
giving the syrup its dark, distinctive
port wine color. To balance the
sweetness of the sugar and give the
syrup its tang, he added lime juice,
citric acid, and phosphoric acid. Then,
as the basic blend cooled, Peton turned
to the question of flavor. Into the mix
went vanilla extract, elixir of orange,
and several pungent oils refined from
various fruits, herbs, and trees, lemon,
nutmeg, spice brush, coriander, and
naroli. The last ingredient in perfumes
distilled from a flower of the orange
tree. The most exotic was oil of cassia,
also known as Chinese cinnamon, made
from the bark of a tree found in the
tropical regions of Asia. And of course,
Peton added this brew to the fluid
extract of cocoa leaves. Exactly how
much cocaine went into the inaugural
batch of Doc Peton's new soft drink
syrup is impossible to calculate more
than a century later. But with even a
touch of the drug in combination with
the sugar and caffeine, four times the
amount in today's Coke made Peton's
concoction quite a stimulating beverage.
[laughter]
Yes. Yes indeed. As best as I was able
to read from a few different sources, I
think roughly once Coca-Cola starts
being produced in that first decade,
call it four or five glasses of
Coca-Cola would be about the equivalent
of a line of cocaine today.
>> Okay? So, it would take a lot of
Coca-Cola. If you're drinking that much
of that formula, you're having the
equivalent of 16 Cokes worth of
caffeine. It's a absolute crap ton of
caffeine and sugar. By that description,
the cocaine probably would affect you
less than the sugar and caffeine in the
mix.
>> That's a good point. Regardless, you're
going to get hype when you drink this.
>> And this amount of cocaine really was
only a part of the formula for those
early first few years.
>> Yes.
But it lends the first half of the name,
which Peton's business partner at the
time, a guy named Frank Robinson, comes
up with the simple, descriptive, perfect
name for this new brew, Coca-Cola, which
is funny because it neither contains
much cola since the caffeine is actually
an extract and it's just a tiny little
drop from the cola seed. And very soon
they would strip out almost all the
cocaine. And so you have a product that
for the next 140 years would be called
Coca-Cola that contains really not very
much Coca and really not very much cola.
>> Yes, indeed. So they go about getting
the new product installed and
distributed in drugstore soda fountains
around Atlanta. But Ben, you were saying
a minute ago about, oh, drugstores were
this gathering place at the time.
Remember I said about bottling
technology? If you weren't selling
alcohol, which had natural
preservatives,
>> the only way that you could buy and
consume a drink that really wasn't like
water or milk or something. It was
fresh. And so that's how soda fountains
come to be installed in these
drugstores. They're selling the patent
medicines, many of which are liquids.
And that's also how carbonated water
comes to the drugstores because mineral
water, carbonated water is thought to be
a health tonic. And so it all mixes
together. And then over the years these
morph into social places thanks in large
part to Coca-Cola.
>> Makes total sense. And I'm pretty sure
what actually happens is Peton lets his
formula settle and it's kind of this
thick syrupy thing, brings it down the
street to the first drugstore and that
drugist, that proprietor is the one who
actually combines that syrup with the
carbonated water and makes the choice,
which I think could have gone either
way. Is it a still or a sparkling
beverage to give it that champagne
sparkle to create the Coca-Cola that
would endure from there?
>> Well, thank goodness they do use the
carbonated water. Could you imagine Coke
if it were still? That wouldn't be very
good.
>> No. Well, it wouldn't be as successful.
I mean, there was probably hundreds of
things like Coke that were still that
did not succeed.
>> So, pretty quickly Coca-Cola gets into
market with these drugstores and soda
fountains and people love it. This is
great. It's a dualbenefit product. It
has all the medicinal benefits of
cocaine and caffeine, the cola that
they've been marketing and it's actually
really enjoyable to drink and it tastes
great. So the next year in 1887, Frank
Robinson, the business partner who also
named the drink, he also introduces the
script logo. Like he writes out the
Coca-Cola script logo that we still use
to this day.
>> This is unbelievable. I read that this
guy was Peton's bookkeeper. And yet he's
the one who came up with the name
Coca-Cola and the Spencerian script, the
logo Coca-Cola, which has been unchanged
other than just tightening it up a
little bit since he created it in 1887.
>> Yes, it is true that he was his
bookkeeper, but he was also his business
partner. It was like
>> It's like I'm your bookkeeper type
thing.
>> Yeah, [laughter]
exactly. So the two of them come up with
a pretty ingenious advertising and
distribution method because in the early
days they don't yet have a ton of
capital to start spending on
advertisements like all the other patent
medicines out there. They decide that
they are going to offer tickets to
consumers redeemable at their local
Atlanta soda fountains for free glasses
of Coke. and they start mailing out
these free Coke tickets or coupons, you
might say, to every address in the
Atlanta city directory. [laughter] And
then they also give them to traveling
doortodoor salesmen to go hand out on
their routes. Not Coca-Cola salesmen,
but salesmen that are selling a variety
of different products.
>> And this is the very first
manufacturer's coupon redeemable at a
retailer. Yes, there's an image on
Wikipedia of one of these tickets from
1888 that is the oldest
known coupon used in America. And it is
actually beautiful. It kind of looks
like a dollar bill. We'll put a photo of
it in the email. It's incredible. This
becomes absolutely
huge [snorts]
for Coca-Cola and integral to its
success.
>> Well, yeah. It's a high gross margin
product where you can give out giant
amounts where if you mail someone a
little ticket that says you can come and
redeem a free drink that tastes good
that's full of sugar, caffeine, and
cocaine. I'm pretty sure they're going
to buy more from you. It's a high gross
margin product. You have lots of dollars
to play with. And on top of all this,
this is kind of a new product category.
This notion of a soft drink that's not a
patent medicine that's much cheaper than
traditional patent medicines. And so you
do actually need to do some category
creation marketing where you make people
aware that this cool new thing exists.
Yep. All of that is true. And even more
so, this couponing strategy aligns
incentives for everybody in the value
chain in a way that had never been done
before. Consumers, they love it. They
get free drinks of this great tasting
beverage.
>> Yep. drugstores and soda fountains, they
super love it because now they're
getting more foot traffic. And then once
consumers come back and start buying
their second, third, fourth, you know,
400th drinks, this is a highly
profitable drink for them to sell, they
have gross retail margins on this. And
then three, the traveling salesman who
Peton and his associates are giving
these tickets out to, well, they love
it, too. This is like, oh wow, now a
great new free benefit I can offer my
customers. Why wouldn't I want to do
this? It's this incredible
invention that completely incentivizes
rapid extreme growth in distribution of
the product. So to further illustrate
how awesome this is for the soda
fountains, Coke when they were selling
gallons of syrup to the soda fountains,
they sold them for about a dollar. 300
per gallon. The soda fountains then sold
drinks to customers at 5 cents a drink.
They're 128 drinks per gallon. They're
making $6.40
of revenue for a product that costs them
a buck 30 to buy. Yeah, I'm not a
retailer, but I'm pretty [laughter] sure
those are good margins.
>> Pretty sweet deal if you can get it
then. And pretty sweet deal to be
McDonald's today offering my large Coke
with a meal.
>> Yeah, man. [laughter]
Pretty sweet deal indeed. Okay, so all
of this happens within the first year,
year and a half of Coca-Cola being on
the market. Pretty quickly, Peton, who
wasn't really doing much anyway after
inventing the drink, as we said, Frank
Robinson named it, made the logo, is
doing a lot of the distribution work.
Peton becomes convinced that he's dying,
>> which he generally was slowly over all
these years.
>> Yes. And he secretly decides that he is
going to sell off the rights to the
formula
>> without telling Robinson.
>> Without telling Robinson. without really
telling anybody. This kicks off a whole
mess of very questionably legitimate
transactions
that results by mid 1888, early 1889
in Frank Robinson discovering what's
going on and seeking out a wealthy
Atlanta businessman named Asa Candler to
come in and be his new partner to
reunite all these various claims to
ownership of the formula and a company
that they can then grow and scale and
manifest its destiny across America and
the world. And Asa Canandler is really
the person who creates the modern
Coca-Cola company with Frank Robinson's
help in 1892, which he incorporates as
the definitive Coca-Cola Company.
>> All right. So, David, this is the first
professionally
version of the Coca-Cola Company.
>> Yes. But to give you a sense of just how
much of a hit this product becomes, how
quickly, even in the couple years before
the professionalization and the founding
of the Coca-Cola Company in 1887, so the
first year that Coke, the product is on
the market, Peton and Robinson sell 600
gallons of Coca-Cola syrup to soda
fountains, which equates to about 75,000
glasses of Coke served. By 1889, 2 years
later, that has quadrupled to over 2,000
gallons. And by 1890, it's almost 10,000
gallons. So, what's that? 3 years into
the business with no professional
management, they grow the business 10x
without even really trying.
>> It's amazing. And in that next year,
1891, when Asa Candler buys the last
piece to fully own Coca-Cola, he got an
incredible deal. Even with all that
growth having already happened, he only
paid $2,300
to buy it all. That is the base of the
company that he builds.
>> And that's just buying all the various
rights and claims from the people that
Peton sold it off to. No capital needs
to be invested in this business ever.
>> Unbelievable.
>> It is a cash flow bonanza since like day
one.
>> It's crazy. So, in 1892, the first
official year of operation of the
Coca-Cola Company, we have the books. We
know just how profitable they were. They
spent just over $20,000 on ingredients
and production costs. And I think that
includes all like operations and stuff,
too. There's only like three people
working in the business [laughter] here.
So, they spend just over $10,000 on
advertising. Okay. And with those costs,
they sell 35,360
gallons of syrup at an average price of
a buck 30 a gallon. So that is $46,000
in revenue and $12,000 in profit. Now,
for reference, the average household
income in 1892 was about $500. There are
three people working in this business,
including Candler, the owner. They made
$12,000 in annual profit in the first
year of the business. So they are
crushing it.
>> So that's each person at the company, if
they were paid equally, is making 8x the
average household income.
>> They are uh in a promising business. And
that's just for the Coca-Cola company.
Remember, the soda fountains are selling
to consumers at $6.40 a gallon. So the
actual gross revenue of Coca-Cola in the
marketplace in that first year is close
to a quarter million dollar.
>> That's a4 million on would you say a
little over $20,000
of ingredients and manufacturing?
>> Yes. And then another $10,000 in
advertising.
>> So that's crazy. Only a tenth of the uh
ultimate sale price of the beverages is
there in the costs of the ingredients,
the manufacturing and the advertising
when you fully load it.
>> Yes. So uh there's a lot of margin to go
around. So speaking of advertising
costs, in the next few years they invest
heavily into advertising and of course
the Coca-Cola company does still right
up through to this day. The advertising
they were doing on the one hand is very
different than Coca-Cola advertising
today and specifically it's different in
that it's all purely intrinsic
advertising. It's about the nature of
the product itself. Remember they're
still sort of positioning Coca-Cola as
this dualuse refreshing beverage
non-alcoholic social drink but also
patent medicine. So here's some of the
early ad copy during this period.
Coca-Cola is the ideal brain tonic and
sovereign remedy for headache and
nervousness. It makes the sad glad and
the weak strong. [laughter]
>> Yeah, it feels patent medicine-y.
>> It feels patent medicine. Not uh, you
know, a pause that is refreshing just
yet. But what Robinson and Canandler do
do that is very much still on brand for
Coke today is they are all about outdoor
and point of sale signage and presence.
So they put the script Coca-Cola logo
everywhere across Atlanta. They make oil
cloth signs. They paint murals on walls
of buildings. They do billboards. They
put it in street cars. They print
posters for all the soda fountains to
display. Then they're like, "Why stop at
posters? Let's make calendars. Let's
make cabinets. Let's make serving trays.
Let's make glasses. Let's make clocks."
All with the big Coca-Cola logo. They
would go on to paint 20,000 murals on
the signs of barns and walls across the
countryside starting in 1894. [snorts]
Unbelievable.
>> Incredible.
>> What you're talking about, David, is
this great use of all these extra margin
dollars. They would do all this for free
for drugstores and they would say, "Hey,
don't you wish you had like a big,
bright, beautiful sign to bring
customers into their store?" And
Coca-Cola would design, pay for,
fabricate, and deliver signs for
drugstores that had the store name in
big letters. And Coca-Cola's name just
as big. And they did this for thousands
of drugstores across the South. And so
you see all these great old pictures of
these stores that effectively look like
Coca-Cola stores.
>> Oh, they're beautiful. Yeah.
>> It almost looks like they're franchising
Coca-Cola rather than Coca-Cola just
being a thing that's sold at the
drugstores. It's so beautiful because
like you said, it seems like they're
franchising Coca-Cola with no capital
investment and the drugstores freaking
love it because they're making 80%
retail margins on this Coca-Cola. Of
course, they want it to be their number
one product.
>> They want a big advertisement says we
have Coke.
>> Yes. So, by 1898, Coca-Cola is
distributing over 1 million branded
promotional items per year. This is
before the year 1900.
>> Yeah.
>> Nuts. They also start expanding
geographically
because we talked about syrup earlier.
All the Coca-Cola company is doing here
is selling this concentrated syrup. It's
the drugstore soda fountains that are
then mixing it with carbonated water and
making it a drink. The syrup is small,
compact, it's shelf stable. It's easy to
transport. combined with the couponing
strategy, they've got this killer
national growth strategy. So by 1895,
Coca-Cola is being sold in at least one
soda fountain in every single state and
territory in the United States at this
time. Wild. Wow. Yeah. And if you look
at old pictures of this time, they had
landed on what you were talking about,
the intrinsic advertising, a slogan that
most people will know, delicious and
refreshing that you see on all the old
Coca-Cola memorabilia. That's coming
into view. They're not yet talking about
the lifestyle you could have if you
associate with Coke. They're talking
about quality and they're also talking
about price. They're advertising as many
places as they can. Hey, this is 5
cents. They also start for the first
time working with celebrities and
athletes in some of these advertisements
that they're doing. And of course, as
you would expect, in 1895, they
trademark the Coca-Cola script for the
first time. They are granted that
unbelievably valuable trademark.
>> Yes. The delicious and refreshing slogan
that actually evolves during these
years. And it's Frank Robinson who
starts to lean more towards delicious
and refreshing and the social benefits
and away from the patent medicine brain
tonic slogans. There's actually a great
quote on this from him in for God
country and Coca-Cola. He said, "We
found that we were advertising to the
few, i.e. people who needed a brain
tonic when we ought to advertise to the
masses." And so he starts dropping all
this, oh, sovereign remedy for headaches
and nervousness stuff and then starts
really emphasizing the drink Coca-Cola,
delicious, refreshing. This is really
important because he's hitting on like,
hey, Coca-Cola is for everyone. It's not
only for people who have something wrong
with them that they need a medicine to
fix. It's not a niche. It's not a
demographic. It's for everybody.
>> Yeah. And two, just instinctually, he
understood, hey, we don't want to
associate our product with negative
things, with problems. Headaches,
nervousness, those are problems. We want
to associate our product only with
positive things, delicious, refreshing,
friendship, etc., etc.
>> Yep. Which is so funny. At this point,
all the cocaine is not gone yet. we
still have uh [laughter]
>> it's being marketed as this unabated
good while at the same time the
company's like we should probably do our
best to start moving away from cocaine
because it doesn't actually seem to be
the value proposition that people are
here for.
>> Yes.
>> And the anti-ocaine sentiment is coming.
>> Yep. Before they fix the cocaine issue
though, Canler in 1899 makes what is
maybe simultaneously the best and the
worst business deal in history.
[laughter]
He gives away the right to bottle and
sell CocaCola for free.
>> Yes. Definitely one of the dumbest deals
ever if you just look at it as it was in
that moment, but would be sort of
Coca-Cola's second great business model
innovation after couponing. So in 1889,
two guys from Chattanooga, Tennessee
named Benjamin Thomas and Joseph
Whitehead come to Campbler with a
proposal. They want to bottle Coca-Cola.
They're convinced that bottling
technology has matured enough at this
point that they can now bottle fully
mixed Coca-Cola beverages. And not only
will they not go bad, it'll keep the
carbonated fizz. It will still be
delicious when opened and consumed at a
later date.
>> And Canandler's like very anti-bottling,
right?
>> Yes. He is extremely skeptical.
He's like, "Yo, we've tried this before.
I really don't think the technologies
there.
I'm not sure about this." Thomas and
Whitehead, though, they're very
persistent. They say, "Well, totally get
that. Understand that. What if we do it
at no risk to you? You let us buy
Coca-Cola syrup from you, same as all
the soda fountains are doing. We will
bottle it and sell it at our own
expense, and if the product isn't up to
your standards, you can just pull our
license and we'll stop selling it."
Candler thinks it over, and he's like,
"That's a pretty good deal. I've got
nothing to lose here. Why not? I'll let
you two young bucks have a go at this."
So, in July of 1899, the three of them
sign a contract that includes the
following terms. For a token contract
price of $1, which Candler never
collects, the Coca-Cola Company will
sell syrup to Thomas and Whitehead at a
volume discount price of $1 per gallon.
So, even less than they are selling to
the individual soda fountains out there
because I think this is going to be a
higher volume business. Thomas and
Whitehead will have the exclusive
assignable right to market and sell
bottled Coca-Cola for 5 cents per
bottle. Same price as at the soda
fountains across practically the entire
United States.
>> But this 5 cents per bottle, operating a
bottler is a tougher business than
operating the soda fountain in this
respect because there is one meaningful
additional cost, the bottle itself.
>> Yeah, the bottle. [laughter] You can see
why Candler was reluctant to get into
this business. Thomas and Whitehead must
use only Coca-Cola syrup. They can never
use any substitutes or competitors as
the syrup for the products that they are
selling. They cannot sell to soda
fountains. That channel will remain
directly sold by the Coca-Cola company.
And if they fail to supply enough
product to meet the demand for bottled
coke in the territories that they have
rights over, the contract will be
forfeit. The Coca-Cola company will
provide all advertising needs for the
product and maintain all control over
advertising. And that's it. There is no
term length on the [laughter] contract.
And um gosh, there's got to be something
in there about how that $1 per gallon
could change over time, right?
>> Nope. No, there is not.
>> So, the Coca-Cola company, as long as
this bottler continues to satisfy the
demand and doesn't violate any of the
other terms, is obligated to keep
selling syrup at $1 per gallon.
>> Yes.
>> To the bottler.
>> Yes. And the bottlers are obligated to
keep selling bottles to the public at 5
cents retail cost.
>> Fascinating. [laughter]
>> So, let it be written.
>> Obviously, there are so many things
wrong with this, [laughter]
but also so many things right with this.
[gasps] This lets [snorts]
the Coca-Cola Company enter and scale
the bottle business completely
capital and investment free. They don't
have to do anything besides advertising,
which they are already doing for their
growing national business.
>> In fact, they're not doing any different
advertising. They're just amortizing the
cost of the same advertising against one
more touch point that they could have
with the customer. They're still
painting the same barns. They're still
putting up the same signs.
>> Yep. So, Thomas and Whitehead go back up
to Chattanooga. They set up the
Coca-Cola bottling company and they
start selling bottled coke for the first
time to groceries, stands and saloons as
they put it. Obviously, all three of
those are pretty big markets for
Coca-Cola today, especially the, you
know, like groceries and stands, aka gas
stations, convenience stores, etc., etc.
>> And at this point in history, in 1900,
the Coca-Cola Company is still just 20
employees.
So they're about to get ridiculous
leverage on just a handful of people
that work at the parent company and that
includes making the syrup. It's a small
head office. High margin product, baby.
>> Yep.
>> So pretty quickly, two things happen
with uh young Thomas and Whitehead here.
One, they didn't actually know each
other very well before going into
business together. They end up getting
into a fight and splitting into two
separate companies. Remember, the
contract is assignable. They can do
whatever they want with it. So they
split up the territory across America
and they say, "Great, we're going to
assign the rights we have in this
contract with the Coca-Cola Company to
our two separate companies." And then
they both independently decide, you
know, man, actually owning and operating
these bottling operations and dealing
with the capital investment of both
setting up the production lines and then
buying the bottles and recycling them
and returning them and cleaning them,
etc. It's a kind of low margin, very
upfront, capital intensive thing to
bottle Coca-Cola
>> and operationally very intensive too. Of
course, we've realized we can just
assign the rights that we have here.
Well, why don't we keep assigning the
rights? [laughter] They start
subcontracting out little subterritories
to other entrepreneurs and small
bottling operations across the country.
And so basically overnight, first dozens
and then hundreds of local Coca-Cola
bottling operations pop up in these
entrepreneurial endeavors in basically
every town and countryside across
America
>> that have no contractual relationship
with the Coca-Cola company. They have a
relationship with this quote unquote
parent bottler,
>> either Thomas or Whitehead.
>> Yes. So Thomas and Whiteheads companies
come to be known as the parent bottlers
and then all the guys doing the actual
work come to be known as the actual
bottlers or the first line bottlers.
This is the ultimate rent seeker. I mean
Thomas and Whitehead just have like a
little toll booth set up in between the
Coca-Cola company that owns the
intellectual property and makes the
syrup and markets it and the bottlers
who are actually doing the work. And
they're just clipping little coupons as
the money flies by on the way over to
the bottlers and the Coca-Cola company.
>> But hey, Campler and Robinson weren't
going to do this. So like more power to
him,
>> right? That is the argument here is that
there is economic value from Thomas and
Whitehead and actually spurring bottling
to happen at all.
>> Yes. And they need to go find the local
bottlers and set up these entrepreneurs
and teach them how to do it. Eventually
they're doing nothing. But in the early
days, they're not doing nothing.
>> That's true. Within 10 years, they
managed to find 400
proprietors of bottling operations, get
them to stand it up, and by 1925, there
was 1,200. So, it is a busy busy 25
years finding all these child bottlers.
So basically this creates a second wave
of blitc scaling if you will for the
Coca-Cola company across America because
they'd already nationally expanded to
soda fountains but soda fountains are
only in towns large enough to have a
soda fountain. What about all the rural
areas of the countryside? Not to mention
just the simple market expansion of
letting people drink at home or wherever
at restaurants anywhere else. It's a
huge deal. The net of this is that
within a few years basically every
single man, woman, and child in the
United States becomes intimately aware
of and familiar with Coca-Cola and the
company doesn't have to lift a single
finger to do it.
>> Yep. This reminds me a lot of our Visa
episode where we were talking about the
difference between if you're Visa and
you're scaling as a network of networks
versus if you're MX as a closed loop
system. And we were talking about how
Visa achieved tremendous scale relative
to their head office size, their
employee headcount, and they did it in a
very short period of time. Coca-Cola is
sort of in the same thing here where
they can scale so fast because of the
bottlers where they're not actually
having to do all this work themselves. I
don't think Coca-Cola is the ubiquitous
international product that it is today
where they just created and then won the
market without this bottler scale thing.
>> No, absolutely not. If they had taken
the AMX approach and Candler had
decided, ah, you know, we're gonna enter
the bottling business ourselves and
we're gonna go market by market and
invest the capital in the production
lines and the bottles. Absolutely no way
would they have reached the critical
scale that they did in the country and
then internationally too. They use the
same model to go around the world.
>> Yep. And Coca-Cola would start referring
to this as the Coca-Cola system. I don't
think we've ever studied a business
before that has a system like this where
you can look at the Coca-Cola company,
which is ostensibly what we're doing on
this episode, but actually to understand
the scale and impact and reach of the
product, you sort of have to look at the
system holistically. the sum of the
Coca-Cola company and all the bottlers.
The crazy thing is this is still the
system today. Coca-Cola still doesn't
bottle. I mean, we can talk about the
exceptions to that, but in large part,
and their desired end state is there's
all these bottlers around the world that
they just sell syrup to.
>> Yeah. It's kind of like Microsoft and
Intel in the PC era, except even more
closely tied. It'd be like if Microsoft
had contracts with Intel where they got
to stipulate what the processes were
going to look like and what the machines
were going to look like.
>> It's funny. The thing that it made me
think of was uh it's kind of like our
Rolex episode where Rolex, you don't
want to be in the authorized dealer
business. It's operationally expensive.
The training is hard, but you do want
the control over the retail experience.
And Rolex managed to have their cake and
eat it too. Like we talked about that on
that episode where they can kind of say,
"Hey, it's a privilege to be able to
sell our watches and so you're going to
make your store conform to our exact
standard." Coca-Cola does the exact same
thing with the bottlers and they say,
"Hey, you have a license to print money.
It's not as much money as we're going to
print, but you can print some money and
you know it's going to be a good
business."
>> More than some money, the local
Coca-Cola bottlers usually become the
wealthiest family in any given town
across America.
>> Very true. But just to make sure we're
super clear, Coca-Cola versus their
bottlers, the Coca-Cola company has
higher gross margins, much better
returns on invested capital, requires
less invested capital. They get to focus
on just making syrup and marketing. They
don't have to do any of the
undifferiated stuff. You'd much rather
be Coca-Cola than the bottlers, but it's
a good business to be the bottler, too.
>> Especially if you're a small town
entrepreneur in, you know, turn of the
century America. Like, hell yeah. And if
the Coca-Cola company is going to
dictate terms to me and tell me exactly
how red my truck needs to be and that it
must say Coca-Cola in this particular
way and the bottles must come off
exactly like this, that is fine. I will
agree to all of this because I know I'm
going to make money. Yes.
So once things turbocharge with the
bottlers and scaling across America, a
lot of imitators and copycats start
popping up trying to make another cola
drink, use the same model, go to other
bottlers or maybe other aspiring
entrepreneurs who didn't get the
Coca-Cola franchise, might want to open
a competitive franchise in their local
town, etc., etc. By the mid1 1900s,
there are hundreds of Coca-Cola
competitors out there. There's Afracola,
Charcoa, Caroca,
Coca-Cola, Fig Cola, Coca-Cola, King
Cola, Standard Cola, on and on and on
and on and on. And by the way, a Cola
like what I'm holding up right now,
David, this brown flavored fizzy drink
wasn't a thing before Coca-Cola.
Coca-Cola was insistent that we aren't
the Coca variant of cola. Coca-Cola is
one thing that means our formula, our
secret formula with this mystery
merchandise 7X, which is the real crux
of the formula. And there's no other
things that can be colas because we
created the concept of Coca-Cola and we
are N of one. So in 1905, Congress
passes the Federal Trademark Act in the
United States and they federalize
trademark protection in the country.
Previously, it was just done state by
state, which I think is probably how
Coca-Cola trademarked the script logo
earlier than that. Might have just been
in Georgia.
>> Yep.
>> Of course, the Coca-Cola company is one
of the first registrants for their
trademark and they start using this new
law to sue the crap out of all the
competitors out there
>> and really winning on these grounds that
like cola isn't a category. You can't be
a something cola. It's not a general
term. We own Coca-Cola as a lockup.
>> Yes. and they succeed. So over the next
like 15 20 years, by the mid20s, it's
estimated that Coca-Cola sues and shuts
down over 7,000
copycat cola brands [laughter] in a very
very busy legal department. And this
becomes the next critically important
pillar of building Coke. Only Coke is
the real thing. Coke is real. Everything
else is an imitator. It is a copycat. It
should not exist.
>> Yep. And there is a famous 1920 case
that went all the way to the Supreme
Court. There was a company called the
Coke Company, Ko K, that was insisting,
actually, it's worth an aside here to
say at this point in time, Coca-Cola did
not embrace the nickname Coke. One,
because of the affiliation with the
drug. And we should say by 1905, cocaine
is pretty much entirely gone. There's no
more coke in Coca-Cola.
>> Yeah, it's actually an amazing story. In
1903, they contract with a company
called the Schaefer Alkaloid Works of
Maywood, New Jersey,
>> that has developed a process to
deccoanize cocoa leaves. And this
company, which still exists to today and
is still the sole supplier of decanized
cocoa leaves, Coca-Cola today,
>> is granted a federal exemption by the US
government from the DEA. They're the
only commercial entity in the United
States that is allowed to import coca
leaves
>> cuz they import it with cocaine in it
still, right?
>> Yes. And then they have a process to
take the cocaine out of the cocoa
leaves. They sell the decanized cocoa
leaves to Coca-Cola. And I'm pretty sure
the way that this ended up happening was
the Hoover administration said, "If
federal agents are present on site and
can supervise the destruction of the
cocaine byproduct, then you can do this
on American soil. You can import the
cocoa leaves, do this, create a giant
pile of cocaine, and then we will watch
you destroy it." And that's still how
they produce Coca-Cola.
>> Yeah. Which is also another piece of
protecting Coca-Cola. Nobody else has
access to cocoa leaves. you want that
taste, you ain't going to get it.
>> Cuz the cocoa leaves, as much as the
cocaine is gone, the cocoa leaf is still
an important part of the formula. So
anyway, there's this 1920 case where
Coke Ko ke is sort of tongue-in-cheek
saying, "What do you mean? You guys
aren't saying you're Coke, so certainly
we can be Coke." And the other point
they were making is CocaCola, you guys
can't actually even use your trademark.
It's unprotectable since there's not
really much cocoa in it and all the
cocaine's been removed. So, it's
actually misleading,
>> false advertising.
>> You're misleading the public by saying
that you are Coca or Cola. You're not.
And the Supreme Court says, "Uh-uh. We
are ruling in favor of Coca-Cola. It is
a phrase that has transcended being a
descriptive name, and it is now just a
brand." And the official ruling, which
is the stuff of legend, contains this
phrase. Coca-Cola means a single thing
coming from a single source and well
known to the community.
And that is the new description of what
the Coca-Cola brand is and why it is a
trademarkable thing that has nothing to
do with Coca or Cola. So this is the
first biggest front of the war that
Coca-Cola wages on the imitators through
the courts.
>> It goes to the Supreme Court.
>> To the Supreme Court. Amazing. The
second most important front of the
battle against the imitators is the
bottle. So Coca-Cola realizes, hey,
we're not actually in the bottling
business ourselves,
but we have full control over it. If we
really want to drive home to consumers
that CocaCola is the real thing and have
it be immediately identifiable what the
real thing is, we actually can force our
bottlers to develop and invest in a
proprietary bottle that'll become
instantly visually known to all
consumers in America and then around the
world. And this results in 1916 in the
famous proprietary bottle that you all
know today, the Ben you are drinking out
of right now, the Contour bottle, as it
is officially called or as it is then
known in the vernacular, the May West
bottle.
>> Yes.
>> Because its proportions look uh like the
famous actress May West.
>> Okay, David. So the bottle,
>> the May West bottle.
So, in 1912, the Coca-Cola Bottling
Company sent a note to all of its
members that Coca-Cola Company has this
great distinctive logo. It's highly
protected in the courts. We've got the
trademark on it, but we don't have a way
to protect our business as the bottlers.
So, the proposal is that the members all
join together to create a distinctive
package for the products. And so in
April of 1915, trustees of Coca-Cola
Bottling Association vote to develop
such a distinctive bottle.
>> Yes. And this is great. At the
convention of the bottlers, where I
think they approved this, the Coca-Cola
company's head of legal, a guy named
Howard Hirs, who was doing all these
lawsuits of the imitators across the
country. He comes with the mission of
trying to convince these bottlers that
spending this great capital expenditure
is going to be in their interest. And
this is what he says to them. We are not
building Coca-Cola alone for today. We
are building Coca-Cola forever. And it
is our hope that Coca-Cola will remain
the national drink to the end of time.
The heads of your companies are doing
everything in their power at
considerable expense to bring about a
bottle that we can adopt and call our
own child. And when that bottle is
adopted, I ask each and every member of
this convention to not consider the
immediate expense that would be involved
with changing your bottle, but to
remember this that in bringing about
that bottle, the parent companies are
bringing about an establishment of your
own rights. It's exactly what you're
saying, Ben.
>> Wow.
>> Isn't that amazing? What an oridor.
>> Help us help you. Wow.
So they create this design brief and
they send it around to 10 different
glass companies around the country that
says, "We want to develop a bottle so
distinct that you would recognize it by
feel in the dark or lying broken on the
ground." So simple. It's like, what do
you really want the product to be? And
so the root glass company of Terry Hoot,
Indiana designs the bottle that goes on
to win the contest. You all know what it
looks like. the contour bottle.
Interestingly, so it's got this sort of
wide top and then sort of a, as one of
the books put it, a snatched waist,
which is why they call it the May West
bottle. It's this Georgia green color.
>> That's right.
>> But hilariously, the first version of it
was actually much more round.
>> Yeah. It was almost like a cartoon
version of the bottle you know today.
And you might wonder why this sort of
like striated, striped, super round pod,
something got lost in translation and
the bottle was designed to look like the
cocoa plant. [laughter]
The cocoa pod that you smash open to get
out cocoa beans. This is a whole
different thing called the cocoa plant,
not the cocoa plant. Coa versus CO A.
>> Yeah, I read about this, too. But
ultimately, it satisfied the design
brief. You definitely recognize it. It's
super distinct. It's kind of beautiful
with the sort of rounded, we'll put it
in the email. All based on a
misinterpretation of what the plant
actually is, but very distinctive.
Ultimately, in 1915, the patent for the
contour bottle gets granted, actually
not referencing Coca-Cola at all because
they wanted the whole thing to be a
surprise when it hits the market. They
would then, this is some classic
Coca-Cola lawyering, get additional
patents for iterations on the design
that effectively renewed the patent all
the way from 1915 until the final one
expired in 1951.
The company then went to the patent
office and made the case that the bottle
shape was so distinctive and so
wellknown in 1951 that it should be
granted trademark status, which they
got. It is highly unusual for packaging
to be granted a trademark. And their
rationale was, look, in 1949, we
conducted a study that showed that less
than 1% of Americans could not identify
the bottle of Coke by shape alone.
>> It's an integral part of the product,
the brand. There you go.
>> Talk about a successful accomplishment
of that creative brief that all those
years later, 99% of America could look
at it and say, "That's a Coke bottle."
Amazing. So by the next year, one year
after, everybody in the extended
Coca-Cola family system is prospering
and nobody more so than the Coca-Cola
company at the top. Yes. And they had
gotten a variety of monkeys off their
back at this point. The cocaine is gone.
They've really started defending the
trademark. They've got this bottle
thing. They had another issue where
there was a federal regulator who
thought caffeine was evil. So they
appeased him by cutting the caffeine
content down by 2/3.
>> Yep. And by this point in time, the
Coca-Cola brand and what it stands for
and the beverage delicious, refreshing,
it's such a integral part of America
that taking out the cocaine, cutting the
caffeine by twothirds or by three/4ers
doesn't really impact things. The
country is still hooked on Coca-Cola.
>> In fact, it probably helps.
>> It probably helps. Yes. Makes it more of
a wholesome beverage.
>> It makes it so you can consume a lot
more Coca-Cola.
>> Okay. So, 1916, everybody's doing great.
Nobody's doing better than the Coca-Cola
Company. Asa Handler is a big man about
town in Atlanta. Probably the most
important person in town. So much so
that a group of other Atlanta citizens
convince him to run for mayor,
[laughter]
which he does, and he wins and becomes
the mayor of Atlanta in 1916. And so he
retires from Coca-Cola and gives his
Coke shares to all of his children. And
then a couple years later in 1919,
a local banker named Ernest Woodruff
puts together an investor syndicate and
basically stages a takeover of the
company and buys out the family members
for $25 million. This also effectively
serves as the IPO of the company because
it's a syndicate of investors and shares
start trading hands and the company
becomes publicly traded and uh certainly
they didn't need to raise capital
[laughter]
by going public,
>> right? And it was a complicated little
period because some of the kids did want
to have this happen, other ones didn't
want to have it happen. and there's sort
of family infighting. But ultimately
after a few years, Ernest Woodruff and
his syndicate of investors do own and
control the company. In fact, there was
some clever financial engineering that
had to happen to buy this company. Like
$25 million in 1919 is a huge amount of
money. And so, as a result, this is
actually the first time the secret
formula for Coca-Cola gets written down.
It had been sort of this cool secret
before, but as collateral for the loan
that Woodruff took out to complete this
transaction,
>> they wrote down the formula and placed
it in a vault at the Guarantee Bank of
New York
>> cuz that's where they got the capital
from. And so they get to hold the
formula as collateral. Prior to this, it
had always been verbal. The system Asa
Kandler set up was insane. So, this is
from the book Secret Formula about Asa
and his son Howard Candler. Asa made his
son memorize the contents of the various
containers that were stored carefully in
a locked room with their labels peeled
or scratched off for days with his
father standing watch over his shoulder.
Howard practiced making the ultra secret
flavoring compound merchandise number
7X, learning to recognize the pungent
fruit and vegetable oils by sight,
smell, and remembering each was put on
the shelf when it came in from the
supplier until he knew by heart the
proper amounts and the exact order in
which to mix them. This is crazy. The
way in which this giant mass-roduced
thing is created. It's like only stored,
I believe, in two people's head at any
given time. And they deliberately kept
this a trade secret and didn't patent it
because if you patent something,
eventually it does become the property
of the public and anyone can use it to
further innovate. But Coca-Cola has kept
this secret all these years.
>> Yeah. And it's still part of the lore at
the company to this day that, oh,
there's two people that know the formula
and they can't travel together. Well,
the formula is out there. Like you can
find it on the internet.
>> Really? The Coca-Cola company would
maintain that is absolutely not true.
>> Well, the original formula is I it's in
the appendix of For God Country and
Coca-Cola,
>> which I think they also maintain is not
the right formula. I mean, I would swear
up and down, too. But yes, this is like
the best example ever though of someone
electing to use a trade secret instead
of a patent and then creating all this
lore and secrecy and myth around it. But
for six years as collateral, the first
written version of the formula was in
the Guarantee Bank of New York vault.
>> So Ernest, when he takes over, he's a
banker. He's an investor. This is like a
crown jewel investment that he could get
his hands on in Atlanta. He doesn't
really have any interest in running it.
So the company plots along for a couple
years with the existing management team.
Ernest really doesn't like this
perpetual contract thing with the parent
bottlers. [laughter] He's like, "What
are you two guys doing? I, as far as I
can tell, you're not doing anything."
He tries to get rid of that. This leads
to all sorts of lawsuits. The parent
bottlers win. Ernest is frustrated.
Finally, in 1923, he's had enough. He
decides that he's going to recruit a new
company president to come in.
>> This is just four years after he buys
it. And almost against his will, he has
to consider his son, Robert, as a
candidate. And Ernest barely approves of
this wayward son, Robert. Who is this
Robert Woodri character? He's the
protagonist of this story. I mean, for
all the John Peton lore and all the Asa
Kandler lore, Coca-Cola, as we know it
today, is Robert Woodruff's Coca-Cola.
>> The boss, as he would come to be known.
Yes.
>> So, Robert is 33 at this point in time.
He has left Atlanta to seek his fortune
away from his father's influence and he
has become the vice president of the
White Motor Company in Ohio in
Cleveland, Ohio.
>> Yep.
>> Which I think was one of, if not the
largest truck manufacturer in the US at
the time.
>> Yep.
>> And Robert is a star there. He's widely
regarded as one of the most talented
young executives in new burgeoning
corporate America here in the 20s. He's
best friends with the Major League
Baseball star Tai Cobb. They go hunting
together. He's like a man about town.
And Standard Oil of New Jersey is trying
to hire him as an air parent to come in
and potentially be the next CEO of
Standard Oil of New Jersey. And David,
do you know what Standard Oil of New
Jersey is today?
>> Uh, so right.
>> Exxon. It's Exxon Mobile.
>> Oh, Exxon. That's right. That's right.
>> I can never keep track of which breakup
company became which. So, yeah, there's
an alternative future where instead of
CEO of Koke, Robert Woodf became CEO of
Exxon.
>> Exxon. Yeah. And Robert through his own
devices, again almost against his
father's will, had been an original
investor in the syndicate that bought
out Coke from the Candlers. So the board
of Ko makes Ernest consider his son.
[laughter] Ernest finally says, "All
right, fine." His first offer to Robert
to come be the new president of
Coca-Cola is a salary less than half of
what he's making at White Motor Company.
[laughter]
Robert rejects that. They negotiate back
and forth and finally they reach a deal
with Robert saying one condition that I
absolutely must have is you dad you are
out. You are going to fully [laughter]
exit the business. Everything gets
handed over to me and I am going to have
full control and run this company.
Ernest is frustrated enough. He says,
"Okay." So, in 1923, Robert takes over
as president of the Coca-Cola Company,
becoming the youngest president of any
major corporation in America. At that
time, he would run the company for the
next 32 years as president and then
control the company as chairman of the
board for another 30 years after that
until his death in 1985.
Wild. So, one of the first moves that
Robert makes when he comes in is to
become close with the head adman at KO's
ad agency at the time, a firm in St.
Louis called the Darcy Ad Agency. And
Coca-Cola's main creative account man, a
guy named Archie Lee. Lee had already
created a hit slogan for Coca-Cola in
Christmas of 1922 with his thirst knows
no season campaign, which is, you know,
a great phrase with a great ring to it,
but was particularly good because Coke
had a legacy of primarily being enjoyed
in the summer.
>> Yeah. You drink it in the hot southern
summers of Georgia.
>> Yeah. So, they're like, wintertime is a
big opportunity for us. And this was
part of moving in on Christmas. More to
come on Christmas in a sec. And
together, Archie Lee and Robert Woodruff
make a pretty massive leap forward for
Coca-Cola advertising. And it's really
the last critical piece of the brand.
They
embrace, maybe I might even say create
lifestyle advertising. This is
everything that we talked about in the
Rolex episode, but that was much later
when Rolex did that in the 50s and 60s.
This is in the 1920s. Coca-Cola is
inventing this idea that through
advertising we can associate our
products with feelings. Oh yes. This is
the sort of opposite of the intrinsic
advertising that we were talking about
earlier. This is exttrinsic advertising.
Advertising that really has nothing to
do with the features of the product.
It's about the life you will live if you
associate with our brand.
>> Yes. Coca-Cola isn't a carbonated
sweetened soft drink with unique flavor
manufactured by the Coca-Cola Company.
Coca-Cola is happiness. Coca-Cola is
friendship. It's romance. It brings you
closer with the people you love.
[laughter]
Coca-Cola is summertime. Coca-Cola is
holidays. Coca-Cola is Christmas.
>> And whether you are in America or not in
America, Coca-Cola is America.
>> Yes. And boy, do the two of them just
turn out some bangers. So Archie
eliminates basically all verbiage from
Coca-Cola advertising except for one
simple slogan. So this is radical. Think
back to those original ad copies that we
were reading a minute ago.
>> So many words.
>> In this day and age in the 20s, there's
so many words. Everything is so
descriptive. In 1923, when Robert takes
the helm of the company, they come out
with Coca-Cola, always delightful.
Period. Four words. That's the campaign.
The next year in 1924, they do better.
Refresh yourself.
>> That's it. You don't need to say
anything more. And that was simplified
from Archie Lee's original idea for the
theme that year. Pause and refresh
yourself. He would uh
>> come back to that a couple years later
in 1929
with the grand slam, mother of them all,
the pause that refreshes, Coca-Cola,
which is so funny cuz I know this is the
winner. The pause that refreshes is the
most successful campaign of this era. I
actually didn't hear about that at all
until doing this research. I associate
all these other campaigns delicious,
refreshing or always delightful, but god
did that take off. I mean this idea that
in your life you just need a pause and
everybody experiences that problem of
needing a pause and we are the thing
that you do during that pause.
>> Yeah, genius.
>> But by today's standards of language,
it's a little bit clooji. I think
>> I think there was a element of the
context of the time that came out in
1929, same year as the stock market
crash. And so all through the 30s of the
depression, this idea that coke
>> is a pause away from the harsh realities
of your day-to-day existence in the
depression, a simple luxury that you can
take a pause and refresh with for only
five cents when everything around you
is, you know, going to I think it
really resonated. Yeah.
>> So, the slogans are revolutionary,
cutting out all the verbiage, all the
descriptive language. The other half of
what Archie Lee and Bob Woodruff do with
the brand is the imagery. So, Lee goes
out and he contracts with all these
famous American artists and illustrators
of the day to create these like American
lifestyle tableau for the visual aspects
of the Coke ads. Yeah, it should be like
a Coca-Cola advertisement that's as
>> idyllic as a Norman Rockwell painting,
you might say. Yes,
>> because they actually go get Norman
Rockwell [laughter]
>> along with NC Wyatt and Haden Sunloom
and like some of the greatest American
artists of the day to create what you
think of as the idyllic Americana family
life. It's all coming out of the
Coca-Cola ad department
>> and they're partnering with the most
looked up to athletes and celebrities.
You know, these athletes promoting
health. That must be part of why they're
so great at athletics. They have Carrie
Grant, Gene Harlo, just associating with
wholesomeness in Americana.
>> Archie Lee would describe the function
of the imagery aspect of the campaigns.
says, "The idea in an illustration must
hit the viewer like a shot. It ought to
force the exclamation from them, what a
peach of an idea. Not only that, but
they must remember that it was CocaCola
that was refreshing and good to drink in
the image." And so he and the Darcy
agency come up with a list of
commandments for the Coca-Cola account.
Some of them are never split the
trademark Coca-Cola on two lines.
Coca-Cola must always be together on one
line.
>> The circular sign should always carry
the phrase delicious and refreshing. You
should never refer to Coca-Cola as it is
not an impersonal pronoun. It is
Coca-Cola. And you should never use
Coca-Cola in the personal sense such as
Coca-Cola invites you to lunch or
Coca-Cola invites you to enjoy.
Coca-Cola is above that.
>> The other thing that happens in this era
is billboards. By 1930, there are now 29
million cars on the road. So, billboards
sort of became this really valuable way
to promote the brand and lifestyle of
Coca-Cola. And Woodri, his lieutenants,
would often go around saying that what
Woodruff wants to do is make Coca-Cola
the most American thing in America.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, speaking of the most American of
things, how about the uh
commercialization of Christmas and uh
[laughter] Santa Claus?
Because in 1931, Lee and Woodruff and
the Coca-Cola crew create what I think
is unquestionably the greatest lifestyle
advertising success in human history
where they manage to associate Santa
Claus with Coca-Cola.
>> It's amazing. And really bring the
modern Santa Claus into existence
period. They sort of standardized the
concept of Santa. The one that we see
today is pretty much Coca-Cola's Santa.
>> Yes. Okay. So, what happens? KO does not
invent Santa as a, you know, common
urban legend.
>> Right. First, let's bust that myth.
>> The concept of Santa Claus existed long
before 1931 in Ko. The uh famous Night
Before Christmas poem was written in
1823. So, it's been around for a long
time. And of course, there was St.
Nicholas. It goes back many, many
hundreds of years. And there was a very
popular Santa which was Thomas Nast's
Santa who was this sort of shorter
elflike Santa. We'll link to it in the
email that is on its way to becoming
Santa but is not the big smiley
approachable sort of redfaced cheery
jolly Santa.
>> Big fat dude. Yeah.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> Yeah. I mean that's the thing. You know,
you read the Night Before Christmas
poem. Santa's an elf. He's little.
>> Yes. [laughter]
>> Or he was before Coca-Cola. So in 1931,
Ko commissions the artist Haden Sunloom
to create Christmas ad imagery for
Coca-Cola featuring Santa Claus. And so
this being a Coke ad, Sunlum is like,
well, I'm going to make Santa as red as
possible and Coca-Cola Red. And then I'm
going to make him as big as possible to
get as much Coca-Cola red in the
picture. [laughter]
So he creates the first of his Coca-Cola
Santa campaigns that he would make for
the next 33 years until 1964.
And it debuts at Christmas time in a
full color advertisement in the Saturday
Evening Post and people absolutely
love it. You got to remember this is
1931. So this is before television and
magazines had only just started to be
commonly printed in color. So before
this point in time, you couldn't really
get mass- prodduced color images out to
the public. So Santa didn't have a
color. Like nobody really thought about
what color Santa was.
>> That's right. Cuz sometimes Santa was
red, sometimes Santa was green.
>> Yep. Blue, yellow. The point is there
was no standardization. All of a sudden,
now KO's got this huge industrial
imagery machine of not only
advertisements in the Saturday Evening
Post, but all the billboards and the
signs and the point of sale merchandise,
etc., etc., etc., and they're just
plastering America with this big,
beautiful color version of Santa.
>> Which is funny cuz Pepsi also did do
some Santa illustrations, but Coke kind
of ran away with it. And it became clear
pretty early Ko is just going to own
Santa.
>> Yep.
>> David, do you know who Haden Sunlum also
created or uh created the most famous
illustration of?
>> I don't. I should know.
>> There's two. One is Quaker Oats. The
Quaker Oats man.
>> Oh yes, I did read that.
>> Which interestingly is owned by Pepsi
today.
>> Oh, we will get into Quaker Oats.
>> And the other is Aunt Jamaima.
>> Aha, I did not know that. as discussed
on our Mars episode. And this was really
the nail in the coffin for Coke being a
summer drink. I've heard that the most
Coke is now sold during the holidays,
which is amazing since it was a
refreshing thing served
>> for the hot Atlanta summers. Yeah.
>> Unbelievable. They also during this time
period get into partnerships, big giant
landmark brand partnerships. The first
of which is the Olympics. Coca-Cola was
a sponsor of the 1928 Olympics in
Amsterdam, which makes them the longest
running Olympic sponsor and at the LA28
games that will make 100 years of
Coca-Cola partnering with the Olympics.
>> Yeah, I was going to say the 1928 games
in Amsterdam, were there any other
sponsors? Like the Olympics probably
weren't a commercial thing yet.
>> I think that's right. I think it was
really innovative.
>> Yeah, man. No Coca-Cola, no Visa.
[laughter] Right. And this predates all
the stuff that Coca-Cola did with the
World's Fair and with World Cup and with
all these other big sort of global brand
stage events.
>> Interesting.
>> The other big pillar in the ground that
Woodruff puts in in these first 10 years
is around standardization. This is when
he really throws his arms up and says,
"We're going to stop changing the
formula." And my understanding is from
that point on in 1920ish all the way
until 1985
there was no changes to the Coca-Cola
formula. Woodruff's Coca-Cola was that
65year [laughter]
unchanged formula.
>> Oh geez. What happened in 1985 besides
Robert Woodruff dying which is directly
related to what else happened in 1985.
>> We will get there. But it's this notion
of everything should be standardized. It
should be the formula. It should be the
marketing. It should be the packaging.
They were already in this ballpark. But
it was his idea that wherever you are
when you reach for a Coke, it should
feel the same. It should taste the same.
It should have the same temperature. And
so the spiritual thing that he does to
sort of illustrate this is he goes to
the bank in New York and says, "We are
repaying the loan. We are taking our
formula, the canonical oneofone formula,
and we are moving it to our bank, the
trust company bank in Atlanta, which
would become Sunrust, and it would sit
there for the next 86 years.
>> And is now in uh World of Coca-Cola,
right?
>> Yes. And the reason it is there, they
made this whole big parade of we're
taking it out of the bank and we're
putting it in World of Coca-Cola theme
park for lack of a better phrase.
>> The Coca-Cola version of Hershey Park.
>> Yes. That is a vault that is very meant
to be gazed upon because when they did
move it there about a decade and a half
ago, they kind of realized for a long
time to many generations, we made a big
deal of we have this secret formula and
you need to know about it. We're going
to be really loud about it, but it's
super secret so you can't see it. And
that worked and it really lived in the
public's consciousness and it had sort
of fallen out. It was an effort in 2011
to kind of shake the public and
especially the younger generations and
say we are Coca-Cola and we have the one
secret formula and we want to bring it
back to your attention that we have
something that is super secret and worth
protecting.
>> The other thing Woodruff does in these
early years is he creates the company's
first statistical department to do
market research and to study the
business and customers sort of
quantitatively. They realized that by
this point they've basically saturated
the market of every man, woman, child in
America. Population growth is only going
to get them so far in terms of growth of
the business. So what they need to do is
they need to find ways for existing
Coca-Cola drinkers to access and drink
Coca-Cola more often. Now remember what
was Woodruff doing before he negotiated
with his dad to come to Coca-Cola?
He was at the White Motor Company and he
was being recruited by Standard Oil of
New Jersey. He's like, "Guys, we need to
get Coca-Cola into gas stations."
[laughter]
[gasps]
>> So, he decrees that gas stations is the
next major growth opportunity for the
company. We need to take that
opportunity to put a Coke in their
hands. So, they contract out a design
for a cooler because if you're going to
keep Cokes ice cold at 34 degrees in gas
stations, they need to be in a cooler.
They get a company to manufacture it and
they go around the country and install
32,000
Coca-Cola coolers in gas stations around
the country just in the first year. and
giant signs, right, that say Coca-Cola
sold here or drink Coca-Cola or
Coca-Cola always refreshing.
>> Yep. In the gas stations. This is the
precursor to coin operated vending
machines which they introduced in 1937.
And Coke is the first company to do
that. And someone told me in the
research that the gas station owners
absolutely loved this because a the
signs told people you can come get a
Coke here, which was a value proposition
for people, but B, just like we're
talking about, there's so much margin to
go around being the retailer of soft
drinks, especially at this time, that
they were making more money on Coke than
gas.
>> Yep.
>> So, of course, you want this. The gas is
a pure commodity. You're selling against
other gas stations in the area. This is
where you can actually make some real
margin dollars.
>> Totally. You don't make money on the
gas. You make money on the convenience
store, [laughter]
>> starting with Coke. So,
>> the other big change in operations that
Robert brings to the company is the
relationship with the bottlers. This is
part of his standardization push. A
whole bunch of bottlers are great and a
whole bunch are not. you know, there's
1,200 independent businesses out there.
And so he goes around and at first he
starts trying to like bully and
intimidate the, shall we say, less
standardized bottlers into, you know,
meeting his maniacal quality standards.
After a while, he realizes, wait a
minute, why am I wasting my time trying
to convince these small town
entrepreneurs to do what I want? I'll
just buy them out. And so he changes
course for the Coca-Cola company and
says I'm now willing to buy and own and
operate bottlers.
>> Oh.
>> Not because I want to, but as a way to
like force standardization and clean up
underperforming bottlers. I'll buy them
out, fix them up, and then I'll resell
them to local entrepreneurs.
>> I didn't realize that started that
early.
>> Yeah, he started that in the 20s.
>> Wow. He also realizes, wait a minute,
this bottling franchising operation
works pretty well here in America.
Pretty sure we can do it overseas, too.
So during the 20s and 30s, he goes to
Europe, he goes to South America, starts
setting up international bottlers there.
Same model, local entrepreneurs, locally
owned businesses with every incentive in
the world to push Coca-Cola.
>> Yep. Now, there is still that one term
of the deal that was we will always sell
a gallon for a dollar. That starts to
become problematic with inflation. You
want the ability to change the price at
some point over several decades. And so,
it's pretty interesting to think about
the two sides of the coin of having to
sell it at $1 in perpetuity. The con is
obviously well inflation's going to
happen and so our margins are going to
get squeezed where it's just going to
cost more and more and more to make
Coca-Cola. The bet that they basically
were making is well since we can't raise
prices at all we need to scale to
amortatize all of our fixed costs and
get greater and greater economies of
scale on manufacturing. And so it sort
of forced them into this massive scale
mentality that they were already sort of
in. They wanted to be the one Coca-Cola
for the world. But this really backed
them into that strategy as you don't
have another strategy. Your economies of
scale in manufacturing need to outpace
inflation. So get going.
>> Yep. And the flip side of it is it was
also in the contract that the bottlers
had to sell to retailers at the enforced
retail price of 5 cents a Coke.
>> Right?
>> And as we get into the depression, that
becomes a huge lever against potential
competitors.
>> How's that? Because all the other
competitors who are at much smaller
scale than Coke, as the depression hits
and inflation starts running rampant,
they need to raise their prices. But
here's Coke, which is arguably a
superior product. It's certainly
superior in that its brand recognition
is much wider than any competing cola,
and Coke is cheaper. [laughter]
So, it's this amazing leverage that they
have over the market. So between the
trademark litigation, the proprietary
bottle, and now the pricing power across
the market, Coke is just steamrolling
all existing and potential competition
out there.
>> Which is so funny you say pricing power
because it's not more expensive. In
fact, it's most often far less expensive
than the competition.
>> Yes. But I think the competition was
having to hit the nickel price. Yes. to
try and compete with Coke and their
margins because they were subscale would
be much much much worse.
>> Yep. Coke can be profitable at way lower
end consumer prices than the other
subscale companies.
>> Yes.
>> It's like they actually have pricing
power that they're not using.
>> Yes. They have latent pricing power.
>> It's like more strategic to them to not
raise prices.
>> Yes. So, not good news for any
competitors out there. And they
basically all except for a small handful
get steamrolled
except for one. Pepsi, [laughter]
>> which amazingly started way back when
Coca-Cola started.
>> Yep. 1894.
And for many years, it was just one of
the other colas out there, you know,
would be competitors. Actually, I had no
idea about this till doing the research.
Pepsi tried to sell itself to Coca-Cola,
like sell its operations to Coca-Cola
three separate times over the years.
>> Three? I didn't know that.
>> Three times.
>> Wow. And Coca-Cola, you know, the
various owners over the years turned it
down three times.
>> Amazing.
>> Until the depression. And that is what
changes Pepsi's fortunes. So Coke, like
we've just been saying, is selling for a
nickel, and it's super hard for anybody
else to match it. But they had one weak
spot that they didn't quite think
through, and it was actually the
proprietary
May West Contour bottle. It was 6 and a
half ounces. That's not a lot of drink
in that bottle, especially by today's
standards. That's smaller than a mini
can. I think the mini cans are 7 and 12
ounces today.
>> Let's see. I got one right here. The
mini cans very popular today. That's
been a shift. 7 and a half. Yeah, it's
crazy. The original bottles were smaller
than this.
>> 6 and a half ounces. Very small. So even
though they were a nickel, you weren't
getting a lot of refreshment [laughter]
in that bottle. In 1934, Pepsi, in
almost a lastditch effort to try and
just do something to stay alive and save
the company, tests
using recycled beer bottles, which are
12 oz bottles,
>> to sell Pepsi, also for a nickel.
>> And when you say save the company, just
before you go on, this is not new to
Pepsi. The Pepsi that exists today is
like four Pepsis later from the Pepsi
that was started around the same time
Coca-Cola was. Coca-Cola's been
approximately one company all the way
through. Pepsi's been bankrupt two,
three times and sold to new owners and
completely new company started with the
word Pepsi in it. This has been a rocky
road for them.
>> Yes. But this is when it's fortune's
turn. So 1934 they start selling Pepsi
in 12 ounce recycled beer bottles. Now
they still have the same pricing
pressure, you know, and margin pressure
from Coke selling in a nickel. But it
turns out if you look at the unit
drivers of margins on beverages,
>> oh there's two expenses. There's sugar
and there's the bottle. And then
everything else is approximately free.
So, the amount of liquid in the bottle,
like you said, Ben, is approximately
free. Whether you're serving 6 ounces of
liquid per bottle or 12 ounces of liquid
per bottle or later 64 ounces of liquid
per bottle. Yeah.
>> Not going to impact your margins that
much. And hey, oh, by the way, there's a
lot of existing 12 beer bottles out
there that we can buy up super cheap and
put our Pepsi in. Pepsi starts selling
12 ounce bottles also for a nickel.
Their cost structure just declined
because they can get the recycled beer
bottles. Didn't impact their margins by
putting more liquid in there. And now
they've got a really compelling consumer
value proposition during the depression.
Twice as much cola for the same price.
>> Yep. And that is the first real punch
that anyone's been able to land on
Coca-Cola. Yep. This is textbook
counterpositioning. Coca-Cola cannot
respond because they and their bottlers
have just invested all of this capital
and all of this IP into the 6 and 12
ounce Contour bottle. They can't react.
>> Yeah, it's genius.
>> Truly genius. I mean, it was like back
against the wall genius, but genius.
>> Now, it doesn't do much for Pepsi's
brand. They're very obviously saying
like pick us because of quantity, not
because we are the more delicious or
better or more prestigious beverage. And
I think this decision, while it kept
them alive, was sort of a hangover that
they would have for the next 80 years of
this like, yeah, we're not as good.
We're not
>> the best flavor, but like
>> we're also here and you can get a lot of
us for cheap.
>> Well, are they the best flavor? Are they
not? We'll come back to that.
>> Well, that's all subjective. There's a
discount promise to the brand.
>> Yes.
>> Which in 1934
is kind of all that matters with
consumers.
>> Went over real well. Yeah.
>> So Coke can't fight them on the amount
of liquid in the bottle cuz they're
locked into the 6 1/2 ounce
>> and they don't want to cheapen their
brand.
>> So instead they pull out another uh you
know arrow in their quiver to fire
against competitors. They sue Pepsi for
trademark infringement. Pepsi Cola. You
can't use the word cola. We have
trademarked the word cola. So in this
court process, the president of Pepsi at
the time, a guy named Walter Mack, ends
up discovering that Coca-Cola had
illegally bribed and intimidated another
cola competitor out there into shutting
down. They paid a bribe to the company
owner to just shut down rather than
going through a litigation. Mack brings
this evidence to the court where
Coca-Cola is suing Pepsi for trademark
infringement. Bob Woodruff immediately
calls him up and requests a meeting. Bob
comes up to New York, sits down with
Mac, and he's like, "Hey, this is all a
big misunderstanding. [laughter] You
know, I'm a good southern gentleman. Uh,
I don't know anything about this, but
you know what? Why don't we just settle
all of this trademark stuff?
>> You can still use the word cola. Is that
what he's offering him?
>> Yeah. The outcome of this is that Pepsi
Cola becomes the only Coke competitor
that is allowed to use the word cola
legally at this point in time,
>> which destroys any precedent of
Coca-Cola protecting cola. It means they
are forever giving up their argument in
the courts that we own cola as a part of
our trademark. Woodruff apparently uh
despite this consiliation hadn't learned
his lesson and was still not above
trying to bribe his competitors. He
tries to bribe Mac by saying like, you
know, do you really want to be running
this Pepsi thing? I'm still great
buddies with the White Motor folks. I
think you would make a great president
of White Motors. I would really love to
recommend you for that job. And Walter
Max's like, absolutely not. I'm keeping
Pepsi. Thank you for settling the
trademark litigation. [laughter]
And doesn't Coca-Cola's general counsel
quit over this, too?
>> Yes. Yes, that's right.
>> I think the idea is like, come on, we
got to fight this. We can't just like be
giving up our trademarks.
>> Yes.
>> But Woodri, this is one of the few times
where I feel like he put an idealistic
approach aside and said, "We got to be
pragmatic here. We got to settle with
these guys."
>> So, the result of this is that Pepsi
becomes Coke's first real legitimate
competitor. And by August 1941, so it's
at six, seven years later, colas that
are not Coca-Cola, have 14%
of the US soft drink market share. The
majority of which is Pepsi.
It's a major chicken in the arm. It's
basically 100% Coke before this
happened. And Pepsi establishes a pretty
meaningful foothold.
>> Yep. So, you know, on the one hand, this
is a real uh bad thing for the Coca-Cola
company. They went from having
essentially a monopoly on the market to
letting a real legitimate competitor get
established in the US. But
[laughter]
a really, really good thing is also
about to happen to the Coca-Cola Company
that makes the US market itself one of
many, shall we say, and that is World
War II.
>> Okay, David. World War II.
>> All right.
>> Gee, how did Coke end up all over the
world? Hm. So, remember we said a minute
ago that Woodruff had set up
international bottlers in the 20s and
30s before World War II, but none of it
was very big yet. By the time America
enters World War II in 1941, Coke at
this point has already been around for
55 years and has already established
itself as like a quintessential part of
America. So the military and the US
government realize,
hey, coke may actually be one of
America's best weapons in this war. I
mean, one, it's a symbol of home and
something for the troops morale they can
keep fighting for abroad all across the
world. And two, what greater symbol of
American prosperity to bring and plant
seeds of all around the world than
Coca-Cola? It's our perfect, you know,
cultural ambassador product here.
>> Yeah. Whether the rest of the world
looked at it that way, TBD, but I'm sure
the US government looked at it as like a
great ambassador of our values.
>> And however people around the world saw
it at the time, one way or another, they
ended up drinking Coca-Cola.
>> Yep.
>> So, first at the outset of the war, the
US introduces sugar rationing. Coca-Cola
immediately lobbies the government for
an exemption. and they produce
supporting evidence like this letter
from a military supply officer. Very few
people have ever stopped to consider the
great part that Coca-Cola plays in the
building and maintaining of morale among
military personnel. Frankly speaking, we
would be at a loss to find anything as
satisfying and refreshing a beverage to
replace Coca-Cola. In our opinion,
Coca-Cola could be classified as one of
the essential moraleb building products
for the boys in the service.
>> Which is interesting because what Coke
doesn't win is an exemption on the sugar
rationing. What they do win is they get
to supply Coca-Cola free of rations to
the military and they just get to take a
really broad lens on what to the
military means. I believe the way it
ends up coming down is technically yes
what you said Ben but it applies to any
bottler that serves retailers that are
located near a military base regardless
of whether that bottler also serves
civilian customers. [laughter] So for
large portions of the US, yeah, they can
still get full sugar Coca-Cola during
the war.
>> Wow. None of Coca-Cola's competitors,
including Pepsi, get anything like this.
>> This was a big legal battle. Pepsi was
basically saying, "Hey, you can't just
say this supplier gets an exemption by
name. You have to say like colas do."
And the response back from the
government was basically like, "Sorry,
Coca-Cola is about as American as it
gets. And that's what we need right now.
And that's what our our boys are
requesting, including General, soon to
be President Eisenhower."
>> Oh, yeah. He's a Cokeman. So, the
military under Eisenhower grants
Coca-Cola employees quote unquote
technical observer status, meaning that
they can participate in the supply and
infrastructure buildout of the military
around the world just the same as
military infrastructure people. This is
unbelievable. So, as the American
military is like advancing in the global
theater all around the world, Coca-Cola
is right there with them setting up
bottling plants and production lines to
supply the troops
>> and documenting the absolute crap out of
it to use in their advertising.
>> Yes. So, Robert Woodriuff, 1941, comes
right out and pledges that anywhere
where an American soldier is fighting
the war, they will be able to get a
Coca-Cola and they'll be able to get
that for 5 cents. Yep. There are these
just unbelievable quotes from American
GIS during the war that are in forgot
country and Coca-Cola. There's two of
them I picked out here. One, I always
thought Coca-Cola was a wonderful drink.
But on an island where few Americans
have ever set foot, it is a godsend. I
can truthfully say that I haven't seen
smiles spread over a bunch of boys faces
as they did when they saw Coca-Cola in
this god-forsaken place.
>> Wow.
>> And then, if anyone were to ask us what
we are fighting for, we think half of us
would answer the right to buy Coca-Cola.
Again, these are actual quotes from
letters from American GIS during the
war.
>> It's unbelievable. And supply them. They
did. 1941 to 1945, 64 portable bottling
plants were sent to Asia, Europe, and
North Africa. And the best estimates are
that more than 5 billion bottles were
distributed to troops during the war.
>> Wow. I saw an estimate that it was 10
billion.
>> Wow. which of course the US government
loves just as much as it loved it during
the war because what better symbol of
America to have left behind in all these
countries around the world than
Coca-Cola.
>> Yep.
>> So Coca-Cola internally ends up calling
the war effort quote the greatest
sampling program in the history of the
world. And they estimate that the war
effort opened up markets abroad for
Coca-Cola that otherwise would have
taken 25 years and untold millions of
dollars of investment to open. Wow. To
say it accelerated CO's international
roll out is like understatement of the
century. That's international. But then
back home it really cemented Coke as
this is apple pie in a bottle. All the
servicemen coming home, Coke was the
treat that you could get when you were
at war. You better believe they're Coke
drinkers for life now. They're not
switching brands.
>> So after the war in 1950, a third of
CO's profits are already coming from
abroad from all these that they got set
up.
>> And Time magazine features Coca-Cola on
the cover of Time magazine. Have you
seen this?
>> Oh, wasn't it the first product ever on
the cover of the magazine?
>> It might have been. I'm not sure about
that, but have you seen what the image
is?
>> No. It's a painting, like an oil
painting, of an anthropomorphized
red Coca-Cola disc with arms and a face,
and it is larger than the Earth. And it
is sitting behind the Earth, reaching
around and feeding the smiling Earth a
bottle of Coca-Cola. [laughter]
And the caption on the cover of Time
magazine says, "World and friend."
[laughter] The implication being that
Coca-Cola is a friend to the world.
>> Wow. Crazy, right?
>> So, it's funny. Before World War II,
there was a presence for Coca-Cola in
pre-Nazi Germany.
>> Oh, yes. I know what story you're about
to tell.
>> As you can imagine, it became difficult
to supply Nazi Germany with American
Coca-Cola during the war. Since those
factories, German Coca-Cola factories,
lost touch with the mother ship and all
the ingredients that they would need to
source, they found [snorts] alternate
ingredients and made kind of like a
crappier knockoff drink that they could
make with the supplies they had.
>> Yep.
>> That drink is Fanta.
>> Yep. [laughter]
Yeah. Fanta, owned by Coca-Cola, was the
uh brainchild of Nazi Germany Coca-Cola
bottling entrepreneurs,
>> who lost access temporarily to the real
thing and did that instead. They would
change the formula and they would launch
it in the US later in 1960. But Fanta
has its origins as we can't get real
Coca-Cola in Germany during World War
II, so this is what we're making. Name
and all, Fanta is the name they came up
with.
>> Yeah. Parts of history that most people
don't know. Don't you want a Fanta
Fanta?
>> Yeah. [laughter]
[gasps] The thing that happens post war,
just because we've planted this seed
elsewhere to follow it through, 1945 is
the year that Coca-Cola officially
embraces Coke and trademarks it. And
from here on out, they actually do start
referring to it as Coke in the
advertising.
>> Yep. So, coming out of the war,
Coca-Cola's business, at least had never
been better. The brand domestically has
regained any of the ground that it lost
to Pepsi during the depression.
Internationally, they've just
accelerated 25 years worth of market
development into four and are basically
like part of US government policy during
the Cold War to keep Coca-Cola flowing
into countries around the world. For
Pepsi, things are not as bright after
the war. They didn't have any of the
benefits that Coke had. And so once
again, they find themselves in a
position of backs against the wall. Need
to do something different here. So,
right at the end of the 1940s,
they poach a Coca-Cola executive named
Alfred Steel. He does the unthinkable
for a Cokeman. He defects to Pepsi, the
inferior imitator.
>> That's how they refer to it. In internal
communications, they don't write Pepsi.
They say the imitator.
>> The imitator. So, Steel had been an
adman at the Darcy agency and then he
moved to Coke and joined Coke in-house.
Basically, as soon as he gets to Pepsi,
Steel stages a coup and kicks out Walter
Mack, who had been running Pepsi for
like the last 20 years. He shoves him
out and Steel becomes the new president
of Pepsi. He's uh quite the maverick,
shall we say. There are just some
hilarious quotes from him about his uh
management philosophy. One example,
quote, "The whole trick in hiring
executives is to find a good man and
turn him into a prick. [laughter] A good
man will be able to stand the course,
but if the guy was a prick to begin
with, he'll crumble along the way."
[laughter]
And then I don't care if the consumer
wants carbonated sweat in a goat skin
pouch. If so, this side of the room go
looking for goats and that side start
running fiercely in place. [laughter]
This is Alfred Steel. [laughter]
[gasps]
And not only does he turn around Pepsi's
fortunes,
I think Pepsi really becomes the more
interesting company than Coke for at
least the next, call it 30, 40 years
here after World War II. Coke has had
this incredible success on the back of
the war, but they're also pretty fat and
happy. They're not interested in rocking
the boat, shall we say. Steel clearly
doesn't give a crap [laughter] about
tradition or history or anything.
>> Nothing to lose.
>> So Steel when he gets to Pepsi says,
"All right, we're going to do three
radical things." So, one, this was
started by Walter Mack before steel got
there, but he continues it. We are going
to market our product to black
Americans.
>> This was radical probably for any major
consumer industry at the time. We are
going to hire an all black sales team
that is going to target black retail
outlets for Pepsi. We are going to run
marketing campaigns specifically
targeted at the black community with
black celebrities.
Not only was this radical for any brand
at the time, it was especially radical
for the soft drink industry because Coke
was not doing anything close to this. In
fact, Robert Woodruff was openly
supporting segregationist politicians
during this time. So, this is a huge
opportunity for Pepsi.
>> And Woodri would later radically flip on
that, right?
>> Yes.
>> Wasn't he a big part of with Mayor
Hart's field of desegregating a lot of
stuff in Atlanta? I mean, he he
eventually really came around, but
>> during the 40s, definitely not.
>> This was a big area for Pepsi to make
inroads.
>> There's also an element of geography
here, too. I mean, Coca-Cola is
Atlanta's biggest company, is
traditional southern company, whereas
Pepsi's based in New York. Okay, so
that's one. two steel decides. We're
gonna start appealing to this early
trend that I see happening in post-war
1950s America of diet fads. We're going
to position Pepsi as the lighter drink
versus Coca-Cola. It will refresh
without filling. [laughter]
Now, how much of this is actually true
in terms of calories?
>> Which is funny because I think it's
actually even sweeter. It may have even
more sugar than Coke does.
>> Well, this is back in the days before
sugar is vilified. You know, sugar is
okay. Fat is bad. Calories are bad.
>> But I mean, the only calories in soda
come from the carbohydrate macronutrient
and specifically from sugar. And so
there's a direct relationship between
sugar and calories.
>> [laughter]
>> you're assuming that uh consumers back
in the 40s and 50s were thoughtful about
such things.
>> That's true. It's a great point.
>> Yeah. Regardless of any veracity to it,
they start directly trying to appeal to
the light market. And then third, and
maybe most importantly, we are going to
wholeheartedly embrace a revolutionary
new advertising medium and technology,
television, and we're going to use it to
target the youth of America. So, this is
crazy. Pepsi
discovers James Dean. You like the actor
James Dean? Really? Yep. His very first
acting job is in a 19 either 49 or 50
Pepsi commercial.
>> Wow. I had no idea.
>> This ultimately would morph into like
the Pepsi Generation ads later and then
the choice of a new generation,
generation next. All the Pepsi marketing
for the next 30, 40, 50 years of like we
are for the young people, we're for the
next generation. It all starts with TV
and Alfred Steel in the 1950s.
So all three of these things work pretty
fantastically well. [laughter]
In addition to Steel also bringing over
just generally better operational
practices to Pepsi from Coke. He knows
what a real professional operation is
like. He brings standardization and
tighter controls over the bottlers
>> because Pepsi had a similar or today
even still has a similar bottling
system, right? Where they have bottlers
outside the company.
>> Yes. But Pepsi, at least until this
point in time, never had anywhere near
the same kind of uh operational
excellence you would call it today as
Coca-Cola. I mean, remember back to the
12 oouncez bottles, they were using
recycled beer bottles. [laughter]
They're putting Pepsi in beer bottles.
>> Fair.
>> That's what Steel's working with here
when he [laughter] gets to Pepsi.
>> So, on the back of this, Pepsi's US
market share jumps pretty
astronomically. It's in the low 20s in
the early 1950s. By 1955, it's 35% of
domestic market share in America.
>> And basically all of that is coming at
the expense of Coke. I mean, Coke is
still this beloved American brand. But
with these three things that Steel is
doing, like he starts getting a
significant amount of the market. I
mean, KO's not targeting black people.
KO hasn't embraced television yet. And
Coke hasn't even thought hasn't even
crossed their minds about anything diet
yet.
>> It's true. And they're starting to be
thought of a little bit. I mean, this
would happen much more in the 70s and
80s, but they're starting to be thought
of a little bit as the soda for your
parents, not our soda. The cool new
soda,
>> not the choice of a new generation.
>> That's right. [laughter]
>> So, by the mid-50s, Woodruff back at
Coke is finally like, "All right, got to
respond. We need to make a radical move
of our own." He switches KO's ad agency
from Darcy, you know, RT Lee, the whole
legacy of everything that they built
from the 20s, 30s through the war to
Macan Ericson,
>> the most premium ad agency in America.
>> Yep. And one of the first things,
[laughter] this is incredible, I found
in the research that Macan does when it
comes on board with the KO account is it
starts conducting scientific market
research. And one of the first things
they do is they run a blind taste test
between Coke and Pepsi.
>> No way. Coke runs this first internally.
>> Coke runs this first in the late 1950s
or Macan does for Coke. And guess what
they find?
>> That people prefer Pepsi. [laughter]
Consumers, when presented with the two
drinks, Coke and Pepsi, in a blind taste
test, a statistically significant number
of people prefer the taste of Pepsi.
>> Wow.
>> I'm pretty sure Pepsi doesn't even know
this yet. [laughter]
>> So, Macan comes in, they've just won the
account. They think this is, oh, we
found this like really, really important
thing. They come, they present it to
Woodruff. They present the findings and
his response is, "Do not ever share this
with anyone and do not ever run this
test again." [laughter]
Ah, for Ko and Bob Woodruff, would that
that would have stayed the case.
[laughter]
>> It's crazy that it really doesn't bite
him for 30 years.
>> Yeah. another well 20 years after this.
For the moment, Macan does a bunch of
things. One, right away they respond to
Pepsi in television. They say, "Hey, we
got to take TV way more seriously. This
is not just the future. This is the
present."
>> Is this uh things go better with Coke?
>> Yep. They start doing TV campaigns,
jingles. Coke starts sponsoring the
Mickey Mouse Club show starting in 1955.
Ultimately,
what McCann decides, they say, "We need
to unify our marketing collateral AND
MESSAGING ACROSS ALL OF Coca-Cola's
channels. We can't be having different
messaging and different imagery for TV
and for point of sale and for newspapers
and magazines or for our radio ads. The
idea is we need to have one Coca-Cola
site, sound, and sell. It's all the same
integrated campaigns. The first of which
is the things go better with coke
campaign in the early 60s.
>> I see.
>> And then two, as we get into the back
half of the 50s and the early 60s, we're
now in the civil rights movement. They
convince Woodruff and the company like,
"Hey, you can't ignore the black America
market. You need to market to black
Americans, too." So, they start running
ads with prominent black athletes like
Jesse Owens and Satchel Page. And this
is fun. Remember, we learned from Jesse
Cole in our Savannah Bananas
conversation that the Harlem Globe
Troters should have become the NBA. At
this point in time, they were like the
big basketball product in America. So,
yeah, co-sponsors, the Globe Troters,
>> and they had started a little bit before
that with Willie Mays in 1952, too.
>> And then the last thing McCann convinces
Woodruff of is, hey, we need to take
this diet thing seriously. [laughter]
So in 1962, they finally appealed to the
diet market by launching Tab, [laughter]
which is their new diet drink product
that they had considered naming Diet
Coke, but Bob Woodruff rejected it. Now,
the given reason is supposedly he says
if God had wanted Coca-Cola to have
saccharine in it, he would have made it
that way in the first place.
>> There is one Coke. You don't want to
mess with the one and only Coca-Cola.
>> That is the stated reason. I heard
rumors in the research. I couldn't
confirm this, but I heard rumors that
apparently the Thomas company, which is
one of the two parent bottler
organizations, remember back to the
perpetual contract and the parent
bottlers and all that. Supposedly,
they ended up with the rights to have a
10 cent royalty
per beverage on any other products that
the Coca-Cola company launched that
carried the Coca-Cola name.
>> And supposedly that is actually the real
reason why they didn't call Tab Diet
Coke. Whatever the reason, they launched
Tab in 1962.
>> They want to dip their toe in the water.
They're not willing to go all in yet.
They're not willing to lend the brand
that's been built over the last 80 years
to
>> a fad diet product.
>> Yes, exactly.
>> Meanwhile, by that point in time, Pepsi
had launched Diet Pepsi [laughter] and
uh was doing quite well with that.
>> Also, I got to listeners, we'll put a
link in the show notes to this. There is
an astonishing ad for Tab.
>> Oh man, you sent this to me this morning
and I was like, I cannot believe this is
for real. The entire ad is a man sort of
like learing down kind of creepily at
this woman practicing tennis in a tennis
skirt and it's this jolly sort of almost
haunting jingle and the words are have a
shape he can't forget. Tab is a taste to
remember for a shape he can't forget.
When you can't be with him be in his
mind be a mind sticker. Don't you want
to have a good shape? He wants you to
have a good shape. Why don't you keep
your shape in shape? It's great to have
a good shape. Enjoy tab and keep your
shape in shape.
>> The 1960s.
>> Yeah. But dude, they knew in the 1960s,
40 years before obesity sort of started
becoming a conversation, that full sugar
sodas were not good for your shape.
[laughter and gasps]
>> We'll leave it at that.
>> Yes.
Yeah. So, you know, they do enter the
diet market,
>> but the diet market becomes real and
enduring from this point forward. Tab
quickly becomes the bestselling diet
soda in America, I think in the world,
and stays that way all the way up until
they release Diet Coke, which we'll talk
about in a little bit.
>> Yep.
>> Tab.
Uh, recently killed actually.
>> Yeah.
>> It was one of the brands that they
sunset a couple years ago.
>> Oh, did they only kill it in 2020? I
thought it was before then.
>> Yeah. when they winnowed from like 600
brands to 200 in 2020, that was one of
the ones that caught the axe.
>> Interesting. There's one more thing
though that Coca-Cola does in response
to this insurgent Pepsi challenge, shall
we say, in the uh 50s and 60s.
McDonald's.
>> Yes,
>> I know you have the story on this one.
>> Yeah. So, this is actually something
more that McDonald's does and less
something that Coca-Cola does. But boy,
does it become important to Coca-Cola
fast. To illustrate it, if we flash all
the way forward to today, there's a
Coca-Cola executive on the website whose
entire job is the McDonald's division of
the Coca-Cola Company. There is no other
division dedicated to a company like
this. So what happens is Ray Croc in
1955, one of the first things he does
when he gets the expansion rights to
expand McDonald's is to look for a
beverage supplier for this new Illinois
location that he is opening. And he
calls up Coca-Cola and does a handshake
deal, meets in person, and does a
handshake deal with Wadi Pratt, who ran
KO's fountain division. And from that
point forward, for like 40 years, they
built this deeply entrenched
relationship purely on a handshake deal.
>> Wow. There's no contract, no term.
>> No. And I'm sure there is today, but for
a long time, it was McDonald's isn't
going to bid it out like everyone else
always does, and they're going to get
like amazing preferential treatment. And
here's some of the preferential
treatment that they get. Have you ever
heard, David, that Coke tastes better
when you get it from McDonald's?
>> No, but I would believe it.
>> This is like a big thing. People like
insist that I prefer to swing by
McDonald's to get a Coke versus getting
it somewhere else. And if you press,
it's just that it's a fountain and you
like fountain versus bottle or and
they're like, "No, it's actually better
at McDonald's." It is better at
McDonald's.
>> No way. Here are a variety of things
that I've heard from somewhat credible
sources and that show up in articles
that may contribute to the taste
actually being better. The thing that is
definitely true is Coca-Cola ships the
formula to McDonald's in stainless steel
tanks instead of being delivered in
bags. Normally it's bags wrapped in
cardboard and it's actually delivered
through the bottlers even though the
bottlers have nothing to do with it.
They are the delivery arm.
>> Oh, yeah. Cuz this is the fountain
business.
>> Yeah. Coke doesn't actually deliver the
syrups to all these restaurants. The
bottlers do it on behalf of them, even
there, though. There's no bottles
involved. So, Coke is quote unquote
selling directly when they sell syrup to
fountain owners.
>> But the bottlers are doing the delivery.
>> Yes. With McDonald's, it's different. It
comes in these stainless steel tanks.
McDonald's does some stuff. They
pre-chill the water and they make sure
that the hoses are chilled all the way
up into the dispenser. McDonald's
apparently actually has a different
syrup to water ratio that accounts for
ice melt. They add a little bit more
syrup than the standard recipe, which
sounds like it would be heresy.
>> Wow. And Coca-Cola lets them do it
because Coca-Cola wouldn't let anybody
else change the mixture.
>> Yes. They developed custom straws that
are a little bit wider to let a little
bit more Coca-Cola hit the taste buds on
your mouth. And this is sort of just
incidental, but because of the volume
that's done at McDonald's of selling
Coke products, the syrup's a little bit
fresher because the syrup actually does
kind of get worse over time if you leave
it in the back room.
>> Wow. Well, uh, it is a beautiful
partnership for both sides, shall we
say.
>> Here's something crazy. I think a lot of
people associate McDonald's and
Coca-Cola, both big American companies,
both historically American, a lot of
Americana in each. Until listening to
this episode, I didn't really think
about the fact that Coke has a 60-year
head start on McDonald's in going
global. And so I read in a couple places
that when McDonald's was opening in new
countries, the employees would camp in
Coca-Cola offices and use Coca-Cola's
relationships to get a foothold in the
country when they were opening. It's
like this unofficial partnership that
they have.
>> Well, it's good for both sides.
>> Yeah. And lastly, Coke sales teams are
prohibited from selling syrup to
restaurants for less than McDonald's
pays, even if it means they're going to
lose the business to Pepsi. It is sort
of this rule at Coca-Cola that no one
gets a lower price per unit volume than
McDonald's.
>> Wow. Big customer.
>> So, back to the 60s. In 1960, a few
other things happen. The first 12 ounce
aluminum cans are introduced of
Coca-Cola in the United States.
>> They also buy Minuteade, right?
Coca-Cola buys Minuteade. Yes, a little
uh precursor to what was to come four
decades later with non-soda drinks, but
this is sort of weirdly the only thing
that they have other than soda for a
long time.
>> Yep. Speaking of acquisitions, in 1965,
Pepsi buys the Fredo Le Company
>> famously where they're still one company
today at PepsiCo.
>> Yep. Ben, you found out Coke had the
chance to buy it, right?
>> Yes, they did. made a giant mistake not
buying it. The company's headquarters, I
think the original Lei company is an
Atlanta company. So, in many ways,
Coca-Cola is sort of the preferred
buyer. And Coke turns it down. Wow. The
wild thing is today, if you look at the
health of Pepsi's beverages business and
their food business with Fredo Lelay
products, Fredo is a much much better
business. While the revenues are a
little bit smaller than the Pepsi
business by revenue, Fredo Lelay
generates twice as much profit inside
the parent company PepsiCo. That's a
good one to own.
>> Yeah. Big miss from Coke.
>> Yeah.
>> On the opposite end of the spectrum,
toward the end of the 60s, Macan and Ko
really start hitting their stride. Ben,
you mentioned in the intro about uh
co-opting the hippie and counterculture
movement. Oh yeah.
>> In 1968,
Macccan and Ko launch their latest
unified marketing campaign,
The Real Thing, which is an enormous
success. And at first subtly tries to
co-op the uh, you know, counterculture
moment. It's real. The hippies love
things.
>> I mean, it doesn't have high fructose
corn syrup yet, so ostensibly, it is the
real thing.
>> If Coke is a real American thing, then
it's the real thing.
This is capped off in 1971
by the series finale of Mad Men.
>> Yes. [laughter]
>> And Don Draper of it, too.
>> Greatest work. I It's so funny. Like, I
know this ad from Madmen.
>> Yes. [laughter]
>> Even though it's considered one of, if
not the greatest television commercial
of all time.
>> Yes.
>> I didn't know anything about it until
the Madmen series finale.
>> So, listeners, if you don't know,
>> the Hilltop ad.
>> Yes. The hilltop ad to the song I'd Like
to buy the world a coke is fictionally
created or alluded to be created by Don
Draper in the finale of Madmen, but of
course is a real ad 40 years before
Madmen came out.
>> It's so cool. Doing the research for
this episode. I always thought that
Madmen was one of the greatest works of
media ever created. I have even more
appreciation. They set the whole thing
up all the way back in the first season
of really the show by introducing Macan
Ericson. Like Macan Ericson comes in as
the foil to Sterling Cooper in the
beginning and then they're running
throughout the whole series. I didn't
realize that Macan Ericson, the reason
they're so big and the reason that it's
such a big thing is the Coke account.
>> Pretty amazing.
>> And then it all pays off in the Hilltop
ad.
>> I think it's given him a little bit too
much credit. If you're going to do a a
show about advertising in this era, you
kind of have to do Macan Ericson.
>> But I didn't realize the deep connection
between Macan and Coke and how like
integral that was. And so now
understanding this makes me appreciate
the series finale just even more. Like
it's so great.
>> For sure. So the story behind this ad is
awesome. So Bill Ber at Macan Ericson
who was sort of the big partner of
Coca-Cola's there
>> the Archie Lee of his day.
>> Yes. for a long time said that he was on
a flight that was grounded at an airport
in Ireland and he noticed a diverse
crowd of passengers and everyone's upset
that this flight isn't happening and
they're chatting and they're joking with
each other and it's over bottles of
Coca-Cola and he's like, "Man, Coca-Cola
really brings people together across
borders, across languages." And he jotss
down on a napkin, "I'd like to buy the
world a Coke." and they conceptualized
this ad and there's this whole great
story of finding the songwriters and the
musicians who performed it and all this
stuff and they want to film it at the
cliffs of Dover in the UK. They got the
budget green lit from the head of
advertising at Coca-Cola to do the most
expensive ad of all time, a $100,000
budget. [laughter]
>> How quaint.
>> And they're going to film it over the
course of three days. And they got there
with the full cast who were going to
stand on the hillside and sing.
>> They wanted to have 200 people of from
all countries around the world. And the
point is that Coca-Cola brings everybody
together.
>> It's a hard cast to assemble because you
need people representing all these
different ethnicities and nationalities.
And they have three straight days of
rain.
>> I was going to say like cliffs of do it
rains a lot there. [laughter]
They burned through the entire budget
and so they're like, "Where are we going
to go that it won't rain? Let's go to
Rome." And so they get approval to go
all the way up to $250,000.
It rains in Rome.
>> No.
>> In the hills outside of Rome. And so
they actually have no usable footage
from everything they shot because by the
time they actually caught the actors,
they were also covered in rain and
looked like crap and no one looked
happy. And so it's this hilariously
cobbled together thing where the third
time's the charm. They have to go wander
around Rome looking for new actors. They
find a new leading lady, that woman that
the commercial opens on. They actually
have to film it in two separate
locations. The hillside is different
from the close-ups, but they ultimately
release it. It becomes absolutely
beloved. It's the catchiest tune. I've
had it in my head the entire time doing
research. They start getting calls at
radio stations to play the Coca-Cola ad
song. So then the band goes and
re-records it as a real song to release
on an album that has different lyrics
than I'd like to buy the world of Coke.
And it turns out to become a bestselling
song also.
>> So great. [laughter] The lyrics are just
uh great. They're great. And it's so
1971 and Coca-Cola.
>> It's the real thing.
>> Yep. I'd like to teach the world to sing
in perfect harmony. I'd like to buy the
world a Coke and keep it company. That's
the real thing. What the world wants
today is the real thing.
>> And you're watching it and it does
actually stir up emotions. You're like,
"This is really beautiful. Look at this.
There's all these people that are all
here together. They're all getting
along." And then you realize this is a
giant corporation selling sugar water
and they managed to borrow the hippie
movement to create one of the most
successful [laughter] commercials of all
time.
>> Oh my god.
It's Mad Men.
>> Unbelievable.
>> Don Draper, baby. [laughter]
>> Yeah.
>> So great. Well, so the end of the 60s
and the early 70s going pretty well for
Coca-Cola.
And then in 1975,
that deep, dark,
deeply embarrassing
secret that McCann had discovered 20
years earlier in 1955. and Robert
Woodruff had tried to bury as far down
as he possibly could comes out. The
Pepsi challenge.
>> All right, David. The Pepsi challenge.
>> I've been so stoked all episode just to
get to this. And to start it off,
>> are you about to do a Pepsi challenge?
>> I am going to do a Pepsi challenge right
here [laughter] on air. Of course, it's
not really a challenge because I didn't
hide the containers and I would
administer it to myself so it wouldn't
work.
>> What temperature are they though?
Because I hear that plays a big role.
>> It does, but they are the same
temperature. I took both of them out of
the fridge right after like World War II
or so. So, however long ago that was.
>> Cuz at warmer temperatures, the Coke
people will insist that Pepsi has the
edge because sweeter tastes better at
warmer temperatures. But Coke at that
just above freezing perfect temperature
is, you know, the best.
>> Well, let's see.
>> All right, that's the real thing seeing
right now.
>> All right, the real thing. It's good.
Oh, Pepsi and Oh, it's got that lemony
little zest to it.
>> Pepsi's a little a little lemony, a
little sweeter. [snorts]
>> I think I'm with the majority on this
one.
>> That Pepsi is better.
>> I think Pepsi tastes a little better.
Wow. David Rosenthal right here on the
Coca-Cola episode declaring that Pepsi
is your pick.
>> Well, over Coca-Cola Classic, but uh I'm
mostly a Diet Coke guy these days, but
we'll get to that in a minute.
>> Which one could argue was formulated to
better compete with Pepsi.
>> Indeed. All right, the Pepsi challenge.
So back in 1967,
a young Wharton MBA graduate joins Pepsi
after a few years of working at IPG, the
big ad agency which owned and I believe
still owns Macan Ericson, parent company
of Macan.
>> Yep, they do. Interpublic group. Now,
Ben, I know you know who we're talking
about here, but uh listeners, you all
are in for a real fun surprise when we
reveal who this person is in a minute.
So, Pepsi, as we've discussed, up until
Alfred Steel came in, had always been
kind of a seat of the pants school of
hard knocks management type company.
this person who joins I think might have
been the first MBA to join the company
and he was one of the very few even like
college graduates. So he comes in as the
director of new product development and
the first new product that he develops
and hits the market isn't a new drink
but rather a new bottle a really really
big bottle 64 ounces. He realizes in
doing market research that hey
supermarkets are becoming more and more
of a thing. We're now in the late 60s
early 70s here. There's a really
underved part of the soft drink market
which is large families and parties for
at home consumption. Buying a whole
bunch of pretty heavy breakable glass
bottles and lugging them home for your
large family or a party that you're
throwing.
>> Or even cans. Who wants to open a single
can for each person around the dinner
table?
>> Totally. And again, remember we talked
about the cost scaling element of soda
is not volume of soda. [laughter]
So it doesn't actually cost that much to
uh go from 6 ounces to 12 ounces to, you
know, a whole lot of ounces.
>> This is why basically anyone is willing
to sell you free refills on your
fountain drink.
>> Yep. So he and Pepsi start working on a
big bottle. And they pretty quickly
realize like, oh, glass is not going to
work. [laughter]
It would be a really heavy bottle and
really breakable as you're porting
around this big bottle. So they go to
Dupant,
I had no idea.
>> And say, "Hey, can you guys engineer us
something that would work here?" And
Dupont says, "Oh, well actually
you have found us at the perfect point
in time. We have a new type of plastic
that we have engineered, polyethylene
terrapith
or pet that we think would be great for
this application. It's lightweight. It's
super strong. It's really cheap to
produce. And here's the kicker for
Pepsi. We can send it premolded to all
of your bottlers. And so rather than
your bottlers having to set up really
expensive new production lines for these
new bottles, all they have to do is just
inflate the molds with air and then fill
them up.
>> Have you ever seen him inflate? It's
like the coolest thing ever watching a 2
liter bottle inflate.
>> The 64 ounce or now 2 L bottle is born.
Pepsi gets a big jump on this against
Coke. It takes Coke another three and a
half years to come out with their own
big party bottle. So on the back of this
success for this young executive
>> and you talked to him, right? This
person you're talking about.
>> Oh yes. All these stories are firsthand.
>> Okay.
>> So uh on the back of this success, Don
Kendall, the then CEO of Pepsi is like,
"All right, kid. You passed the test.
You're ready for your next big job."
>> And this is the first time that plastic
is used, right, in soft drinks?
>> Oh, yes. I missed the punch line there.
This is the first plastic bottle.
>> That's crazy. And good for Pepsi to log
this win. pretty bad for the world to
start this single-use plastics treadmill
that we're all on now. Like, just to get
that out of the way. I was looking up
studies recently, and the Coca-Cola
company is the number one poller
globally of crap in the ocean. Pepsi is
very close behind all the big drink
companies. Everyone is always saying,
"We're trying to do a better job at
this. We're trying to do a better job
creating recyclable stuff, using recy,"
but like the world is full of a crap ton
of single-use plastics. 100% man. I had
not focused on this issue at all until
doing the research. I am going to only
buy can and glass bottles going forward.
Like there's no reason not to buy cans
and glass. They're actually recyclable.
>> It's funny. I've like accidentally
started doing that anyway cuz whenever I
travel now, I use those um path water
bottles that they sell in airports and
you can just refill them. I'm not like
going out of my way to be like, "Oh my
gosh, I need the metal over the
plastic." But like it now it just feels
weird to buy plastic bottles now that
I'm so much more attuned to
microplastics. I'm also never going to
drink fluid that was sitting in a
plastic bottle for a long time after I
opened it or like refill it. I used to
refill plastic water bottles and now I'm
like uh who knows what's degrading in my
beverage. So, but yeah, this is the
start of the plastification.
>> Yes. So, back to the timeline. Don
Kendall, the CEO, is like, "Okay, you
passed the test. You are now going to
take over all of marketing for Pepsi,
and I want you to figure out how we're
going to dethrone Coke." So, the
executive takes over marketing. He's
getting settled in. He's surveying the
current state of things, and he notices
that the local Pepsi bottler down in
Dallas, Texas, is doing something really
interesting. the local ad agency for the
bottler there had accidentally
discovered the secret that Coke and
Macan has known for 20 years that
consumers prefer Pepsi to Coke. And the
way they figure it out is that they're
doing research for 7-Eleven in Dallas.
>> No way. And 7-Eleven is selling a
generic cola at the time. And they run a
taste test with both Coke and Pepsi as
the controls for the 7-Eleven generic
cola. [laughter]
>> And so this local agency happens to also
be the agency of the Pepsi Bottler in
Dallas. And so they go to the Pepsi
bottle and they're like, "Hey, guess
what we discovered?"
>> Wow. [laughter]
So locally in the Dallas market, they
start running these commercials there of
people taking the quote unquote Pepsi
challenge. [laughter]
They roll up to a supermarket in Dallas.
They plunk down a card table and they
have Coke and Pepsi behind like a
cardboard screen and they give the
consumers a glass. They say, "Which do
you prefer?" And a statistically
significant number of people say Pepsi.
And they did this at malls all across
America. They then really expanded this.
>> Well, we'll get to that now. Yeah. At
first, this is just the local Dallas
bottler that's doing it. It's a huge
success. Pepsi's market share in Dallas
jumps by 14%.
Thanks to these ads. Like, it really,
really resonates with consumers. So, the
new VP of marketing sees this and he's
like, "Oh, okay. We we got to blow this
out, but we're not going to do what KO
would do. We're not going to turn this
into like a big corporate one site, one
sound, one sell national campaign.
We got to keep this grassroots. We got
to go market by market. This is working
so well in Dallas because it's
grassroots because it's real people who
are living in Dallas taking this
challenge. And the technology that can
enable this has just come out. VCRs have
come out and early home video camcorders
are just starting to hit the market.
>> So he says, "Okay, here's what we're
gonna do. We're going to go buy a ton of
home video camcorders."
>> Oh, that's awesome. [laughter]
>> And card tables. We're going to
distribute them to all of Pepsi's local
bottlers all around the country. We're
gonna inform them about this Pepsi
challenge and we're gonna say, "Go run
your own versions of the Pepsi
Challenge."
>> Oh, wow.
>> Film them with the camcorders of real
people in your markets taking the Pepsi
challenge and put them on local
television, [laughter]
like local ad spots on local TV
channels. And this is like maybe the
most successful grassroots marketing
campaign in history.
>> I didn't even realize it was grassroots.
I mean, everyone knows the Pepsi
challenge is almost like a descriptive
way to describe a form of marketing.
Like, do you remember when Microsoft did
Bing It On? It was like, "Oh, I see the
Pepsi challenge for search."
>> I had no idea until talking to him and
doing the research. This was all shot
with camcorders. We'll link to YouTube
footage of these old videos. It's all
just malls and supermarkets and beaches
and fire stations around the country and
it's then local ads run on local TVs.
Incredible.
>> Which is funny being our age, David, I
knew what the Pepsi Challenge was, but
of course I've never actually seen it.
>> Right. I hadn't seen it either.
>> And it's funny to now actually go watch
it and see how that meets my
expectations of what I thought it was
going to be.
>> Yes. Same as you. I had the same
expectations of, oh, this must have been
like a BBDO national campaign, you know,
blah blah blah. Total opposite. This is
probably the first quote unquote reality
television commercial that's ever
produced. Like, nobody was doing this
back in the day. So, it just hits all
these local markets around the country
like a bomb. And Coke is so poorly set
up to react to this. their whole
marketing and ad strategy with Macan.
They're all national, one site, one
sound, you know, one cell. They're not
set up to go buy local
TV ad slots.
>> It's good counterpositioning. But the
punchline of the whole thing is it
wouldn't have worked if it wasn't true.
But it was true that people did prefer
the taste of Pepsi.
>> And I think it also wouldn't have worked
if it had been a big national, you know,
sort of corporate roll out because
people wouldn't have believed that it's
true. I think it's really critical that
it was real people that were doing the
Pepsi challenge instead of actors.
>> Yes. Oh, absolutely agree.
>> And I think it was also important. It's
happening in my community.
>> Right.
>> So, they blow this out like all across
the country. In 1977, Pepsi outspends
Coke in advertising for the first time
in history. And Pepsi actually passes
Coke in market share in the bottled
market. So Coke still has a overall
market share lead in the country because
of the fountain business and like
McDonald's,
>> right? Pepsi basically never was able to
break into the fountain business and the
volumes that even today Coke kind of ran
away with the restaurants serving soft
drinks out of fountains business.
>> So it's interesting in the late 70s
Pepsi does try to break in. They buy
Taco Bell and Pizza Hut and KFC and then
install Pepsi. But yeah, it never
approaches Coke,
>> which actually kind of backfires because
then Coke uses it to counterell and they
start going around to everyone else that
is considering Coke or Pepsi and saying
Pepsi owns these restaurants that are
competing with you. Why do you want to
give them more profit dollars? And so
then Coke is able to win sales on that,
which is I think is part of why Pepsi
then spun that all out as Yum Brands,
but also just kind of because I think it
was a drag on their business.
>> Yep. So on the back of this huge,
nationally known, obvious success with
the Pepsi Challenge, the young marketing
executive starts to become, you know,
pretty known in the business community.
>> And David, we should say who it is now.
>> His name is John Scully.
>> Yep. And for some of you, that will mean
a lot. And for most of you, that will
mean a lot. In about 30 seconds,
>> John starts getting a bunch of CEO
offers coming in from recruiters on the
back of his success. And you know, he
loves Pepsi.
He's built his career there. But finally
in 1983, he gets an offer that he can't
refuse. Steve Jobs comes to pitch him
and says, "Do you want to sell sugar
water for the rest of your life or do
you want to come with me and change the
world?" [snorts]
And he goes with Steve and joins Apple
Computer as CEO in 1983.
Yeah.
>> And finish the story, David. What would
then happen after John became CEO of
Apple?
Well, I think the narrative that a lot
of people know, we'll have to save this
for our Apple episode someday, is things
did not go well. Steve Jobs got kicked
out of the company. Apple floundered.
Jobs had to come back. Skully actually
grew Apple's revenue from under 1
billion when he joined to almost 8
billion when he left.
>> Ah, well, Tim Cook before Tim Cook.
>> And then there would be two more CEOs, I
think, before Jobs came back.
>> Yeah. Gilamelio and uh
>> Michael Spindler.
>> That's right. But yeah, John is awesome,
by the way. He's 87 years old. He's a
huge Acquired fan. He's listened to
every single episode that we've done.
>> Also, thank you to Arvin Navaratnam,
front of the show, for introducing us.
It was a fun email to get of like, wait,
John Skully listens to Acquired?
>> Yeah. So cool. He's currently on the
board of three different companies that
he's helped start over the last couple
years and he's responsible for the Pepsi
Challenge. So obviously uh Coke
eventually after years and years of
bleeding thanks to the Pepsi challenge
decides that they need to respond
>> and the response ends up happening a
full decade later. The response comes in
1985 and the Pepsi challenge was in 75
and Pepsi had already been taking share
from Coke starting in like 1970.
Meaningful chunks. Yeah. So why is Coke
so slow to respond to the Pepsi
challenge? Well, in addition to just
plain getting their ass kicked,
they have another problem. So Woodruff
is still the ultimate decision maker and
chairman of the board, but he's getting
pretty old at this point in time. He's
already in his 80s, approaching his 90s.
>> He has strong opinions about what
Coca-Cola is and isn't. But there's also
another
management problem at Coca-Cola, which
is that the CEO, Paul Austin,
has gotten Alzheimer's
and stays in the CEO position. And so Ko
for the back half of the 70s is just
paralyzed. like basically no decisions
can get through between Woodruff being
set in his ways
>> and it's hard for him to see, read,
hear. I mean, he's hard to communicate
with in addition with having strong
opinions and control of the company.
>> Yep. And then you have a CEO suffering
from Alzheimer's and Woodruff probably
doesn't recognize what's happening. It's
a real mess.
>> Yep.
All of this finally resolves in May of
1980 when the board appoints a young
chemical engineer named Roberto Goseta
as CEO.
So Getta was a Cuban immigrant who had
worked his way up to become head of
technical research at age 35. And he was
one of the mythical two people who knew
the secret formula.
>> That's right. cuz he was a chemical
engineer. I mean, he was on the product
formulation side of things.
>> Yep. And he had just had a huge win
within the company when he replaced
sugar in the US with high fructose corn
syrup. He's the one who brought corn
syrup in.
>> So, starting in 1980, he got 50% and
then by 1984, they were replaced at
100%. But basically because sugar kept
getting more expensive and farm
subsidies for corn kept making high
fructose corn syrup less expensive it
became like well as long as customers
are willing to do it and it doesn't seem
to be worse for people's health
economically it became a no-brainer to
do it.
>> Yep. So he's a real darkhorse candidate
to be CEO. The person who everybody
thinks is going to get the job is Don
Kio, the famous longtime president and
COO of Coca-Cola. And so what Roberto
does when he becomes CEO is he says,
"Don, you are my partner in crime. We
are going to run this company as a team.
You'll be my president and COO. You are
great externally. I'm great with the
product and in the strategy internally.
We're going to be a dynamic duo here."
And ultimately, Gowetta got it because
he was Woodruff's protege. I would say
Gowetta, at least as it comes across in
the book Secret Formula, did a very good
job of sort of managing up and making
sure that Woodruff felt taken care of
and informed.
>> I could see that.
>> Yeah.
>> So, they go on to have a great run. One
of the early things they do is they buy
Colombia Pictures, the [laughter] movie
studio,
>> which I always thought this was stupid.
Like whenever you hear stories of, oh,
and at one point in the cod out 1980s
where everyone was doing crazy stuff, KO
even went and bought Colombia Pictures,
>> a movie studio.
>> But financially, it actually was great
for them. Even though no business is as
good as Coca-Cola's core business,
everything pales in comparison, unless
it's Visa or a software company or
something like that. Well, not only was
it financially pretty good for them when
they ultimately sold the business to
Sony a few years later,
it leads to a lot of really good stuff
for Coca-Cola because this is how they
get to know Herb Allen Jr. and Allen and
company who was one of the principal
shareholders of Colia Pictures before Ko
bought it. And so he ends up joining the
board of Coca-Cola after the
transaction. And actually this
relationship continues right through to
this day. Herb Allen III who in the
early 2000s took over for Herb Jr.
running Allen and Company is still on
the board of Coca-Cola.
>> Amazing. So, this is how Coca-Cola
executives start going to Sun Valley
>> where Don Kio reconnects from his old
neighbor from his early young
professional days when he was working in
his first job in Omaha, Nebraska.
>> This is insane.
>> Living on Farnum Street in Omaha where
he was neighbors with Warren Buffett.
Warren Buffett is like this reall life
Forest Gump. I mean, the number of
things that he invested in that would
become these unbelievable bonanza
investments, like greatest of all time
investments. Oh, was a guy who lived on
my street. Oh, was the woman that ran
the furniture store in my town growing
up. Like, it happens over and over and
over again. Are you kidding me? Don Kio
was Warren Buffett's old neighbor. Don's
first job out of college, he worked for,
I believe, a coffee company that ended
up getting acquired by Coca-Cola and
that's how he came into Wow. Coca-Cola.
But yeah, he was just living in Omaha on
Farnum Street.
>> Crazy. And so this is how the Bergkshire
Coca-Cola relationship starts.
>> Well, so Warren at this point in time,
as we covered on our Bergkshire series,
is a Pepsi guy.
He's part of the new generation. He took
the Pepsi challenge. Kio converts him to
Coke by telling him about this new
product that they're going to launch,
cherry Coke, because Buffett loved
cherry syrup in his Pepsi. And so he
converts Warren to a Coke guy before
Warren ever invests a dollar in the
Coca-Cola company.
>> And Warren reportedly drinks five cherry
Cokes a day.
>> Yeah, he is perhaps single-handedly uh
supporting his investment these days.
[laughter]
Later on at Sun Valley, Bill Gates lets
it slip on a panel with Warren and
Roberto and Don Kio that Warren has
always told Bill that Coca-Cola could be
run by a ham sandwich [laughter]
while Roberto is sitting right there.
>> Yeah, Roberto gets very offended and
apparently never talks to Bill Gates
again. Now, given what's about to happen
here, it's actually highly debatable
whether Roberto was a ham sandwich or
not. [laughter]
>> My opinion has always been that
Coca-Cola is the type of business that
could be run. But maybe let's save this
for the quintessence. Like, we should
finish the episode deciding if if that
is true about the Coca-Cola company or
not.
>> Yes.
Well, Roberto is about to become
responsible for both the company's
greatest success since Coca-Cola and its
worst disaster of all time.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. So, first the success, of course,
we're talking about the most successful
diet drink in the history of humankind.
Basically, the only soda that I drink
today, Diet Coke.
>> You're a Diet Coke man, not a Coke Zero
man.
>> I'm a Diet Coke guy. Yeah, I know. Coke
Zero was sort of marketed as the Diet
Coke for men, but uh
like Diet Coke
>> and not just for men, but also the one
that's closer to the original Coca-Cola
formula. Diet Coke is sort of meant to
be its own thing.
>> Yeah. They did those great ads of the
taste infringement ads. Do you remember
those?
>> Oh, I don't remember them.
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. When Coke Zero launched,
they did all this series of ads of
Coca-Cola lawyers going around suing
Coke Zero for taste infringement.
[laughter]
It's a great premise,
>> great sort of uh self-reflective uh
[laughter] advertising from Coca-Cola
there.
>> So, Diet Coke is fascinating because
they did start work on it earlier in the
'7s. It didn't come out till 1982, but
they're kind of in the lab tinkering
with the flavor because the Pepsi
challenge has basically thrown down the
gauntlet that Americans prefer the taste
of Pepsi. And they're starting to play
with this idea of like, okay, obviously
we're not going to replace Coke, but
like, is there a way that we can make
something that does compete with Pepsi,
that tastes a little bit more like
Pepsi, that tastes
lighter or sweeter or they're in the
lab, they're working on it, and
eventually they do land on this formula
that they think is great, and it's
artificially sweetened as you're talking
about. It is a huge risk in two ways to
release Diet Coke. One is because
of everything we talked about earlier,
you gotta be really careful with the
Coca-Cola brand. It's the Sacred Cow.
But two, Tab is currently in 1982 the
bestselling diet drink in the world. So
why would you release another diet drink
that risks dethroning the one that you
have that is the clear winner? And the
answer is
>> you need a win.
>> A, you need a win. B, it is so clear
that diet is going to be a gigantic
market and that's the way the world is
going and we're just holding ourselves
back from competing with our best foot
forward by not using our big brand.
>> Yep. There uh was one other reason why
they finally decided in the late 70s to
start work on Diet Coke.
>> In 1975,
the Coca-Cola Company acquired the
Thomas Company. Oh, so to the extent
that the Thomas company and the parent
bottlers, if it is true that they had a
right [laughter] to a 10-centent royalty
on other Coca-Cola drinks, that is no
longer a problem.
>> Fascinating. So, David, do you know
about how they announced Diet Coke?
>> Ah, I was going to ask you the same
thing. [laughter]
I thought I was going to get you. Of
course I do.
>> I'd be surprised if any listeners know,
but listeners, you are going to delight
in learning this with us. They announced
Diet Coke in the summer of 1982.
>> In July of 1982,
>> the same month.
>> That's right. 43 years before.
>> 43 years before us. A very special
location in the acquired cinematic
universe. Radio City Music Hall.
>> That's right. Diet Coke was announced on
stage with the Rockheads performing to
celebrate the new beverage.
>> That's right. To say it works is quite
the understatement. By the end of 1983,
the first full year on the market, Diet
Coke is the number one diet drink in
America. And unlike Tab, which clearly
from that commercial that you talked
about earlier was exclusively marketed
to women, 30% of Diet Coke drinkers,
even in the early days, are men. And by
1984,
Diet Coke becomes the third best selling
soft drink in America, period, behind
Coke and Pepsi. And Diet Coke costs
significantly less for Coke to produce
because it doesn't have sugar.
>> Yeah. You know what's not as expensive?
Artificial sweeteners.
>> Yes. So, Diet Coke is Go Sweet's like
huge huge grand slam win. And the way
they market it is not apologetic. The
campaign is just for the taste of it.
They are full-on marketing that this
tastes great and it also happens to have
no calories.
>> This is Coca-Cola playing offense.
>> Win-win.
>> It works incredibly well.
>> You can have your Coke and drink it,
too.
>> That's right.
>> And then Goa decides to play defense.
[laughter]
Yeah,
>> with New Coke. So despite all the
success of Diet Coke, and it was a huge
success, even in 1982,
83, 84, 10ish years into the Pepsi
Challenge, it's still kicking
Coca-Cola's ass.
>> [laughter and gasps]
>> KO in 1982 brought in Bill Cosby as
their main celebrity endorser.
>> That's right.
>> And um we'll also link to these in the
show notes. The spots that they have him
do in 82, 83, 84 are directly addressing
the Pepsi challenge. It's unbelievable.
Coca-Cola is a singular N of one
product. Coca-Cola does not exist in a
universe with other competitors. And
here's Bill Cosby directly talking about
Pepsi and the challenge. It's the worst
thing that Coca-Cola could possibly do.
>> They were in bad shape.
>> They are bleeding. And Pepsi, of course,
in typical Pepsi fashion says, "Oh, you
just signed Bill Cosby and you're
talking about the Pepsi challenge in
your spots. We're going to sign Michael
Jackson." [laughter]
>> Just brutal. Obviously both of those men
the world would later find out were uh
deeply problematic but um at the time I
think they had among if not the highest
Q ratings of any celebrity in the world.
Uh Q rating being percentage of people
surveyed who are familiar with the
person and think highly of them.
>> Yeah. But from the time that Pepsi
launched the Pepsi Challenge in 1975
until the New Coke disaster in 1985,
the share of Pepsi grew every single
year in America while the share of
Coca-Cola declined every single year.
And so the question is, if you're
Coca-Cola, what do you do here?
>> Yep. What they decided to do was after
99 years with the same formula,
carefully building a brand around that
logo, the taste, the secret formula, and
defining this cultural object to the
world. Stupidity struck. [laughter]
[gasps] And yes, we can't downplay how
stupid this really was. But somewhat in
their defense, if you're going to
introduce a new taste to try and counter
the Pepsi taste, which you believe is
the reason why you're losing market
share. It has to be a full replacement.
There actually is no logical path to
adding a new flavor. So, a bunch of
people are like, "Well, why didn't they
just release Coke 2 or something like
that?" Remember, Coke is a singular
product. There cannot be two Cokes.
[laughter] It would destroy the brand. I
mean, this destroys the brand, too. But
>> I don't know, David. There's Coke Zero,
there's Diet Coke, there's
>> Well, now there is, but you got to put
yourself in the mindset back then. The
other more practical problem was if they
introduced a secondary flavor and kept
original Coke on the market, they would
bifrocate the base and Pepsi would
become number one. So they were paranoid
about that that oh we're pretty sure if
we have multiple Cokes on the market,
>> who cares what the base like it's just
pure bragging rights.
>> Coca-Cola cared a lot. [laughter]
CocaCola, it's number one. Pepsi's the
imitator. How could they ever stand to
let Pepsi become number one?
>> So, what did they actually do? There's a
lot of people that probably aren't
terribly familiar with New Coke and what
actually happened.
>> So, Christmas of 1984,
the executive team makes the decision.
They're going to do it. They're going to
replace the original Coca-Cola formula
with new Coke.
>> And they've all tasted it, as has
200,000
people. Yep. They've done tons of taste
tests. Not only does it beat Pepsi in
taste tests, it beats original Coke,
people prefer the taste of New Coke.
Robert Woodruff is still alive at this
point. He's 95 years old. So, they're
like, "All right, before we do this,
somebody's got to go have a conversation
with Robert and tell him what we're
doing." And, uh, Roberto, this one is on
you. [laughter]
So, New Year's Day 1985,
Roberto goes to see Robert Woodruff at
his home. Robert can barely hear, barely
speak. And according to Roberto, who is
the only other person present in the
room with him. It's just the two of them
in the room. Woodruff gives his blessing
to change the formula. However,
the very next morning, Woodruff stops
eating. He's hospitalized a few days
later and he ends up passing away on
March 7th, 1985,
one month before the New Coke
announcement.
>> So poetic. The formula was never changed
while Robert was alive.
>> Nope. No, it was not.
So 6 weeks later, Friday, April 19th,
Coca-Cola sends out a press invitation
for the quote most significant
development in the company's nearly
100year history that they are going to
hold the following Tuesday.
Well, news of what is about to happen
leaks over the weekend [laughter]
and Pepsi takes out a full page ad in
newspapers across the country on Monday
morning with the announcement reading,
"The other guy just blinked." After 87
years of going at it eyeball to eyeball,
"The other guy just blinked." And they
gave all their employees the day off to
celebrate.
>> Y [laughter]
Which, by the way, this couldn't have
been sequenced any worse because Pepsi
does that. Pepsi starts giving
interviews to everyone they can in the
press before the announcement actually
happens. And so the press all comes in,
no one's tried it yet. So the executives
can't even get their message out about
it because everyone's just preloaded
with like, how bad are you losing that
this is the case? Does it taste like
Pepsi? Cuz Pepsi sort of seated. Hey,
you should ask them like, is it meant to
copy Pepsi? And the message that the
Coke executives have is that they're
trying not to say too much. They're
trying not to describe the flavor.
They're trying not to compare it to
Pepsi. So, they're up there just looking
like complete idiots with no answers
that are substantive while everyone is
just attacking them.
>> It is a unmitigated disaster. So, at one
point the questioning gets so tough that
Don Kio says, quote, "There's a lot of
things I'd rather be doing than being
here right now. This is at a press
conference at a new product launch,
>> launching the biggest product in the
company's history." And then the final
question of the day, a reporter asks
whether, assuming this new Coke thing is
a success, if Diet Coke will also be
reformulated.
And Roberto responds, "No, and I don't
assume that this is a success. It is a
success."
>> The two crazy quotes to double down on
that. Goa says, "Some choose to call
this the boldest single marketing move
in the history of the packaged goods
business. We simply call it the shest
move ever made."
>> Oh.
>> Then,
>> oh my goodness.
>> Don Kio follows up, "I've never been as
confident about a decision as I am about
the one we're announcing today."
>> Wow.
This is so bad.
>> Which I don't think either of those
things are true. That can't be true.
>> No,
>> just based on how timid they were in the
messaging. So, it turns out that in all
the research that they conducted for New
Coke, all 200,000 people that they did
the taste test with, they never asked
them how they would feel if this new
beverage replaced
the old Coca-Cola. And Getta's response
to this in later years is you can't ask
a question like that because people
don't know. Like, you can't get real
data on emotional questions like that.
You can only actually test do you like
this taste better or not? And so like
sure you can run that experiment but
ultimately how much faith are you going
to put in the data?
>> They would have learned something if
they'd asked that question.
>> Yeah.
>> So the company immediately starts
getting thousands of letters and phone
calls every single day. One of my
favorites is a letter that reads, "My
dearest Coke, you have betrayed me. We
went out just last week as we had so
often. And when we kissed, I knew our
love affair was over. I remember walks
across campus with you, discussing life
and love and all that matters. I
remember the southern summer nights we
shared with breezes leaving beads of
water hanging delicately from your body.
But last week, I tasted betrayal on your
lips. You had the smooth, seductive,
sweet taste of a lie. You have become
corrupted by money. denying your ideals.
[laughter]
Oh man. Or this story. In Marietta,
Georgia, a woman assaulted a Coke
delivery man with her umbrella as he
tried to stock a supermarket shelf with
new Coke. You bastard. She screamed. You
ruined it. It tastes like
[laughter]
>> And I think they just didn't realize
that what they were taking away was
people's childhood. Yes, they're taking
away America.
>> It's not about what tastes better. It's
what they were used to and it's what
they had built an entire lifestyle brand
around believing that America meant to
people.
>> Yes. So, for a couple months from April
to July, they stick with it.
>> Well, cuz here's the craziest thing is
they were prepared for a vocal minority
to be very mad. So, you're sort of in
denial about all the feedback at first.
You're like, "Yep, this is just what we
thought." And then like you get a couple
months in and you're like, "Wait,
>> this isn't ending." Yeah.
>> Does everyone hate this? [laughter]
>> Yes. The answer is yes.
>> So, I thought this lasted a year or two.
And I asked family members. I asked
people who were like, "Yeah, I think
that was like a two or three year
period." There was 79 days between when
they released New Coke and when
Coca-Cola Classic made its return.
>> Yep. So when they finally decide they
got to bring it back, there's a question
of what do they call it and what do they
do with New Coke and Coke and their
lawyers ultimately decide that if they
keep New Coke on the market as the
official Coke and they call the old Coke
Coca-Cola classic, they can make an
argument to all the bottlers the
Coca-Cola Classic is a new drink.
[laughter]
>> Really?
>> Yeah. This is part of why they bring it
back in this way
>> because there was an opportunity to like
renegotiate. Hey, actually the rights
that you own are to new Coke and then
more advantageous deal that we're going
to cut
>> is Coca-Cola Classic. Yeah.
>> Interesting, huh?
>> So on July 10th, 1985, they announced
that Old Coke is coming back as
Coca-Cola Classic and New Coke will
remain on the market. And in the press
conference, Don Kio says, "Some critics
will say that Coca-Cola made a marketing
mistake. Some cynic will say that we
planned the whole thing. The truth is we
are not that dumb and we are not that
smart." [laughter]
I don't know. It all seems pretty dumb
to me.
>> The crazy thing is they thought when
they introduced Coca-Cola Classic that
that would be the product for the
dieards, for this vocal minority that
was really upset about it. And in
practice, what happened is everyone went
back to Coca-Cola Classic and nobody
stayed on New Coke. I mean, its market
share was 3%.
>> Yeah. It plummeted.
>> And I think this completely surprised
the executives of Coca-Cola who were
like, "It's better. We were going to
make small quantities of this Coca-Cola
classic just to appease the people who
need it. But it's crazy. People just
went back to the worst tasting one." So,
there's a delicious, one might say, Koda
to this whole thing.
>> Well, wait, we didn't say the best part
of how this ends. Within a year,
Coca-Cola Classic surged past the
heights of where Coca-Cola was before
the whole debacle started. So, the whole
thing worked as an accidental publicity
stunt. No advertising campaign could
have ever gotten people to pay this much
attention to Coke. In many ways, this
actually did save Coca-Cola. After this,
they started building back share. What's
the song? Um, you don't know what you
got till it's gone. [laughter] This made
people realize, "Oh my god, I do love
Coca-Cola."
>> Yes, you're right. That is the most
important takeaway from this. This is
what finally stopped the Pepsi challenge
[laughter]
is Pepsi won and then after Pepsi
winning and Coke losing, Coke was able
to come back. But yes, they had to
literally kill Coca-Cola in order to
resurrect from the ashes and survive the
Pepsi challenge. The little fun trivia
is David, do you know what New Coke
became after
they removed the name New Coke, but left
the product on the market?
>> Oh, no, I don't.
>> They renamed it Coke 2.
>> And it was not fully abandoned until
2002.
>> Wow. That's how long they stuck with it.
>> Yep. So, I don't know who the KO 2 fans
were, but it was available for you at
some point.
>> [laughter]
>> for a while.
>> Somebody has hoarded a whole stash of
Coke 2 somewhere. It's in some bunker
somewhere.
>> Yes. [laughter]
>> All right. So, the delicious kota to
this whole thing.
>> Please
>> remember how I set up the Warren Buffett
ham sandwich thing. And I think this
whole episode is probably where he
decides Jesus Coca-Cola could be run by
a ham sandwich. Would have been better
off.
>> But actually not, right? This whole
thing was so stupid that it was actually
amazing.
>> What's the Bernard Arno quote? Even when
he loses, he wins.
>> Yes. [laughter]
[gasps]
>> So, after this whole New Coke disaster,
Coca-Cola company's stock is in the
dumps. And who comes in but Warren
Buffett perfect
and buys a roughly 1.3 billion dollar
equity stake in the company over the
next few years and joins the Coca-Cola
board. Turns out to be a
well a debatable investment.
>> He owns about 9.5% of Coca-Cola today.
>> Yep. Bergkshire owns about 9.5% of
Coca-Cola today. That stake is worth
about 28 billion, which is a 22 23x
gross return on the $1.3 billion
investment over the course of 40 years,
which equates to only just over about a
8% irr, but Coca-Cola stock kicks off
these days about a billion dollars a
year in dividends to Berkshire. So in
total, Bergkshire has received about $12
billion in Coca-Cola dividends. So a $40
billion total return on 1.3 billion
invested. Good. But again, this is over
40 years. So that only bumps it up to
about a 10% IRRa on the investment,
>> which I imagine he would have been
better buying Berkshire Hathaway stock.
he would have been better off buying the
S&P 500 over that same time period.
That's brutal. Including dividends over
that same time period, the S&P 500 is up
about 11% annually.
So, the famous Berkshire Hathaway
Coca-Cola investment today is actually
underperforming the market. Crazy,
right? When I did some math on this, my
first glance at it was this has been an
unbelievable investment because even
though the equity value is, you know,
it's gone up, would you say 20 something
X, but over a long period of time, it's
been fine.
>> 22 23. Yep.
>> The dividend yield is insane. They get
800 million to a billion out every year.
And their principal was 1.3 billion.
That's like 60 to 80% dividend yield on
their original investment. I'd love to
park a dollar somewhere so that I could
pull out 60, 70, 80 cents every single
year on that dollar. That's amazing. But
when you frame it the way you did,
>> but 40 years is a long time,
>> right? Over a long period of time, you
better have insane multiples to justify
locking capital up for 40 years.
>> Yep. And you know, the thing about the
S&P 500, right, is it's a rotating set,
>> right? That's not really fair. And over
the last few years, of course, the tech
companies have rotated in and yeah, the
returns from, you know, the Magnificent
7 over the last 10 years dwarf anything
else.
>> But I'm sure buying Berkshire in 1988 to
1994, which was the stretch that he
bought Coca-Cola, and holding it to
today, it would have been a far better
investment than buying Coca-Cola stock.
And that is a fair comparison, unlike an
index, which has companies that rotate
in and out.
>> Yep. By the way, this is the fault of
Coca-Cola over the last 20 years. It had
a ridiculous run right after Warren
invested. We'll cover it at the very end
of the episode, but revenue and earnings
growth over the last 20 years on a
annualized basis has not been great.
>> Yeah. Well, speaking of the good initial
few years of the run there, there's one
more fruit, shall we say, to be
harvested of the Colombia Pictures
acquisition that Goetta and Kio did in
the early 80s.
>> The relationship with CIA.
>> Yes. And super agent Michael Oitz,
>> past acquired guest.
>> Indeed, part of the acquired cinematic
universe. So when Coca-Cola
sells Colombia to Sony,
Oitz and CIA are official advisers on
the deal.
>> That's right. When OIT's tried to take
it from a talent agency and movie
packaging into also doing investment
banking.
>> Yes. And on the back of that success
expanding CIA into investment banking,
Oitz is like why stop there? Why don't
we expand
>> become an ad agency
>> into ad agency land too? So he comes
back to Cozetta and Kio and says, "Hey,
I want to pitch you guys on taking over
as your ad agency from Macan Ericson,"
>> which is crazy. This is CocaCola,
>> but Oitz's pitch is pretty good. He's
like, "Hey, man Ericson has been great
for you guys." And of course, you know,
there was the Hilltop ad and the real
thing and everything over the past set
of years, but hey, this one site, one
sound, one cell thing is not going to
work in the new media landscape. I mean,
look at how badly you got your butt
kicked by the Pepsi challenge in
grassroots marketing. What you need are
different messages that are going to
resonate on different mediums. You know,
we've got the cable network landscape
these days. We've got ESPN. We've got
sitcoms. We've got kids shows. We've got
all this different media. It's not just
the whole family watching I Love Lucy
anymore. You need a whole new approach
for the new media landscape. And so you
shouldn't have just one television ad.
You should have a whole suite of
different television ads for different
audiences in different times of the
year. And there should be a democratic
approach to this where it's not just one
creative director at one agency. You
want the best ideas that can come from
anywhere. and we have all the talent
relationships with all these different
writers, directors, actors. You just
give us a creative brief, we'll come
back with 30 great ideas for you from 30
different sources. So, he pitches KO
that CIA can make 40 ads a year for them
for the same cost that McCann Ericson is
making seven and they can all stay
unified under the new CO slogan of
always Coca-Cola. So in 1992, CIA wins
the business, dethrones Macan Ericson,
and among the many ads that they create
for Coke, is a new Christmas Coca-Cola
motif, not featuring Santa Claus,
but instead the polar bears.
>> Yep. [snorts]
>> Oitz makes the polar bears. Amazing.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah. I mean, he didn't make the polar
bears, but
>> oitz found the talent through the CIA
network to make the polar bears. So, I
think this is basically the climax of
our story. New Coke, what happens
afterwards, the polar bears, these
beloved ads, the rest of the '9s and
2000s,
there's a lot of company building that
happens, but it's just not that romantic
of a story as much as Coca-Cola's first
century was.
Well, the thing that really started to
happen in the 90s and then accelerated
in the 2000s
is the beverage market just moved away
from colas and towards a whole variety
of other drinks. The first battleground
for this is sports drinks and Gatorade.
Yep. So, in the 80s, Gatorade
really came on the scene and established
the market for sports drinks. And
Gatorade was part of Quaker Oats. That's
right. I forgot Quicker Oats ended up
owning it.
>> Yeah. Way back in the day. So,
Coca-Cola, in response to Gatorade's
success, launches Power Aid in 1988.
Power Aid is a homegrown product at
Coca-Cola.
It never achieves anywhere near the same
success as Gatorade. I think it maxes
out market share in like the teens or
low 20s. Finally, in the year 2000, this
is crazy, the then CEO of Coca-Cola,
Goetta, had tragically died of lung
cancer in 1997.
In 2000, the CEO of Coke announces
publicly a $16 billion deal to acquire
Quaker Oats and Gatorade. This would
have been a great deal for the company.
>> Whoa. Yeah, that didn't happen.
>> So, he announced it without board
approval. The board rejected it after
the public announcement. The deal falls
through and the next year Pepsi ends up
swooping in,
>> buying Quaker Oats and Gatorade, and
Gatorade is like a home run for Pepsi
ever since.
>> I had no idea. Wow.
>> Wild, right? It's total echoes of the
Fredo disaster. co could have owned
Freda Lays and Gatorade.
>> Wow.
Yeah. And that is a little illustration
of the CEO at the time. There have been
five CEOs since Gowetta 1998 onward and
the first three only lasted three to
four years each. Very different than the
Woodruff dynasty and the long run that
Getta had also.
>> Yeah. The thing that is extremely clear
that David you touched on is they had to
diversify into what they call a total
beverage company really prompted by this
backlash against soft drinks. The world
sort of lost interest in first full
sugar colas and then colas and the thing
that was kind of driving it not really
in the '9s but in the 2000s and
certainly the 2010s obesity. It was
clear that America was only going in one
direction and sugar and processed foods
coupled with the sedentary lifestyle
that a lot of Americans live is a giant
culprit of obesity. And so Coke's sort
of trapped figuring out what to do about
this. The American Heart Association
comes out and says the recommended daily
limit of sugar for men is 36 grams and
women is 25 grams per day. That's the
recommended limit per day. A 12 ounce
can of Coca-Cola contains 39 grams of
sugar.
>> Yep. 39 grams.
>> So you've got this sort of hard problem
where Coca-Cola itself, just that one
product, that one product line, is this
unbelievable business, super high
margin, low capital investment, brand is
built and established all over the
world. Like it's hard to want to invest
in anything else when that's your
current business. And at the same time,
they need to. It's existential. This
product is probably going to only go
downhill from here. Maybe it's got a few
more years, maybe another decade of
success. But 50 years from now, will
this be your cash cow? No. And so, how
do you start diversifying without
admitting that your current main product
that is the company's namesake is bad
for you? It's just bad for you.
>> Yep. Tough spot to be in.
>> Not an enviable position to be in. And
you can sort of see how that churns CEOs
pretty quickly.
>> Now, the interesting thing though, back
to Pepsi, they've managed this at least
from a business standpoint pretty well
[laughter] over the past set of decades.
You know, first with Fredo, then with
Quaker Oats and Gatorade, then in the
bottled water market. So, Pepsi launches
Aquafina, Coke launches Dani.
>> Yeah, they were pretty late to the game
in waters. I mean, I think the story of
the last 25 years is they sit there in a
privileged position and look around and
wait and see and then when something
really starts happening, then they go
become active in it and they just have
to sort of hope that all the assets they
have, including the Coke distribution
system, makes it okay that they're not
first to market on some of these things.
But I don't know, sometimes it's really
cost them. And the biggest, most
interesting one is Monster Energy. Do
you know the story behind Monster
Energy? Well, I know what happened, but
I don't know the story. I mean, they
started acquiring and investing in a lot
of other beverage companies through the
2000s. There was Oddwala, there was
Vitamin Water, there was Fuse, and then
I know Monster comes along.
>> Yep. So, Monster started, Do you
remember Hansen's Juice?
>> Yes,
>> that is Monster.
>> H I think I vaguely did know this. This
is a wild story. I don't have the entire
story because this is the Coke episode,
not the Monster episode, but at some
point the Hansen leadership realized
that they did want to get into energy
drinks, but their current brand was not
going to be effective in doing so. And
so they came up with this really crazy
brand that felt dark and dangerous to
counterposition the cleaner aesthetic of
Red Bull and ends up going great, better
than they ever could have imagined. So
there were various times early in the
transition from Hansen's Natural to
Monster where Coke could have bought it,
but it was subscale and then there were
sort of lulls and growth and it was sort
of false starts in it becoming the big
giant thing that it became. And also
energy drinks as a category, people
weren't sure how durable it was. You
know, is this really going to be the
thing that it became or is it a fad? So
in 2012, Monster reached out to
potential buyers, including Coca-Cola
and Pepsi, Buck Coke, decided against
pursuing it because the price was high.
Monster's market cap was 11 billion at
the time. [laughter]
>> Goodness. Wow. And what is Monsters
Market Cap today?
>> $70 billion.
>> Yeah. [sighs]
I'd say these energy drinks are uh not a
fad.
>> Yeah. So what ended up actually
happening much later on Coca-Cola was
like, "Ah, crap. We should have done
that." They do sign a deal with them. So
it's a pretty interesting deal. Coke
decided, "We're going to walk away from
being in the energy drink business. So
as a part of this deal, we're going to
do a business swap where Coke gives its
energy drink brands, Nas, Full Throttle,
Burn, Mother, and Relentless to Monster.
Monster transfers its non-energy
business, including the original
Hansen's Natural Sodas, [laughter]
>> amazing,
>> over to Coca-Cola. Coca-Cola becomes
Monster's preferred global distribution
partner, and Monster becomes Coca-Cola's
exclusive energy drink play,
>> and Coca-Cola gets a 20% stake in the
company, right?
>> Well, yeah, but KO had to buy it. So, KO
had the privilege of investing in
Monster in 2015. KO puts in over$ two
billion dollars. At least they're
getting on the train. So KO is the
largest shareholder now in Monster
Energy. And you know that deal looks
pretty good. That 2-ish billion that
they put in is worth almost $12 billion
today. So nice investment, but gosh, if
you're the global total beverage
company, what has the trend been of the
last 15 years in beverages?
>> I bet they sure wish they owned
>> owned Monster. Yeah.
It is funny though, like I'm talking out
of both sides of my mouth here.
>> If you think that Coca-Cola is bad for
you, wait till you see the Monster
Energy.
>> So, it's not just the obesity thing.
There's a trend into energy drinks that
has nothing to do with health.
>> Yeah. It's interesting. You know, the
energy drinks are almost a call back to
the original uh like patent medicine of
Coca-Cola. It's like, yeah, this is
really bad for you, but you're going in
eyes wide open to that. Yes, that's
exactly right.
>> It is serving a function for you.
>> Yep. The other funny thing that happens
is Coca-Cola buys Glasso, which makes
Vitamin Water and Smart Water in sort of
yet another Oh, we should also be in
water play. They pay about $4 billion
for that. The founder then goes on to
leave Coca-Cola and starts Body Armor, a
sports drink that I think is coconut
water-based, a little bit more sugary.
Turns around, sells that back to
Coca-Cola for $5 billion for a startup.
Body Armor did great. Gatorade still has
60% plus of the market share of sports
drinks. Doesn't make a dent in PepsiCo's
number one position in sports drinks.
>> Yeah.
If you're going to look at Coca-Cola as
a total beverage company and say, "What
beverages have really been killing it
the last 20 years that you've managed to
bet correctly on or incubate in house?"
And the answer is Diet Coke and Coke
Zero.
>> Yep. Coke Zero 2005. [laughter]
Taste infringement.
>> For a few years, it was growing at 10% a
year, which is really fast considering
it launched like 20 years ago and it was
already very large. Yeah, it is sort of
ironic that the last 20 years have been
about a metamorphosis into a total
beverage company and it's Coca-Cola,
Diet Coke, and Coke Zero that are
leading the way. Yes. So, that was a lot
of stuff that happened in the 2000s. The
2010s, they did acquire more brands.
They continue to grow the total beverage
company's portfolio. They did a whole
bunch of stuff that we're not going to
spend too much time on in this episode,
rehabbing their bottler operations,
bringing a lot of it back in house,
making sure the quality and the
efficiency was up to where they wanted
to have it, and then spinning it back
out. And so, a lot of these bottlers
came on balance sheet, then went back
off balance sheet to new owners. They
encouraged consolidation among their
bottlers. They finally got rid of the
last little element of the parent
bottlers. And so the story for people
who follow Coke as a company or a stock
is a lot around how good of a job are
they doing restructuring all the
bottlers and it seems like they're
they're mostly through this whole
refranchising thing that they're doing.
So that brings us to the business today.
>> Yeah. And the business today, the
biggest piece is a part of the story
that we basically haven't talked about
since World War II is international.
Coke is a global company.
>> Yeah.
>> Most of the revenue and profits do not
come from the United States. Even though
all the storylines that we've been
talking about are the United States.
>> But I think when people look at the
Coca-Cola that they're holding, they
think about the United States.
>> Right.
>> Maybe that's not true. Maybe I'm I live
here and so I'm ethnosentric about that.
But I'd be curious if Coke feels like
America to you if you're a listener and
you don't live here.
>> Yeah. You know, the other part of it is
Coca-Cola did set up the bottlers as
independent, locallyowned,
entrepreneurial businesses in all the
countries that they went into. Produces
a lot of profits locally.
>> Yep. So, yeah, it is a local business
wherever it is.
>> All right, so let's walk through that.
Here's Coca-Cola by the numbers today.
So, first of all, brands. For a long
time, the thought was just build the
total beverage company and more brands
is better. So, let's just keep going.
They got over 500
around 2020. They did a big slimming and
went down to about 200. And ones that
they got rid of were Tab, Ziko, Adala,
Honesty, Vault. Those are probably some
of the ones you know that they got rid
of. They do have 30 brands that do over
a billion dollars in revenue. It's kind
of crazy that it's a house of brands
that has that many billion dollar
brands. 15 of them were created
organically like Fanta and Sprite that
we didn't talk about in this episode.
>> That's right. Ah, we didn't talk about
Sprite. Do you know the history behind
Sprite? Do you know what Sprite really
is?
>> No, not really.
>> So, Sprite as we all know it today is
not Sprite.
Sprite is Fanta Clear Lemon from
Germany.
>> Really? [laughter]
>> Yep. That they brought over to America
and rebranded it as Sprite. No way. And
they stole the name from um they had a
character named Sprite Boy who was a
part of the Coca-Cola Santa Claus
universe.
>> Yep, that's right.
>> All right. Those are two of the 15 that
were created organically in-house. Three
of them they bought that were already
doing over a billion at acquisition. And
then the remaining 12 of the $30 billion
brands that they have were small and
Coke grew them to over a billion in
revenue underneath their umbrella. So
think Minuteade, Fair Life, and Vitamin
Water. And just to share some of the
other brands they do own. Power aid,
Minuteade, Dani, Vitamin Water, Kozero,
Schweps, ah,
>> Smart Water, CL, which is another water
brand, and Crystal, which is yet a third
water brand. They recently bought Topo
Chico. They're actually playing around
in alcoholic beverages a little bit with
Topo Chico with a hard seltzer. And I
think they're also doing a Jack and Coke
and a Sprite that is uh alcoholic. So
they're starting to dip their toe into
that a little bit.
>> Fanta clear lemon alcoholic. All right.
Has a real ring to it. [laughter]
>> Fresca, Body Armor, Fairlife, and Core
Power, the dairy products. And uh Fuse
Tea. And here's one that is a little bit
of a head scratcher. Costa Coffee.
>> Yes. that they bought for quite a few
billion dollars a couple years ago,
right?
>> And it's a physical retail. It's a
coffee house in the UK.
>> Yeah. It's like a Starbucks competitor.
>> Yeah. So, that's interesting that they
operate a coffee house. By the way,
speaking of coffee, someone told me that
the relationship with McDonald's runs so
deep that CocaCola sources the coffee
beans for McDonald's.
>> Wow.
>> And if it's actually the sole source of
McDonald's, that is a giant number of
coffee beans. Well, it's interesting
with both the Costa Coffee and the
McDonald's coffee. I'm pretty sure we
talked about with Howard on our
Starbucks episode, the Starbucks Pepsi
partnership with Frappuccino, right?
>> That's right. The Pepsi was the bottler
that made the CPG version of the
Frappuccino.
>> Yep. Huge success for both companies.
>> Yep. So, those are the $30 billion
brands that they have. Coca-Cola
serves 2.2 billion servings of their
beverages to the world every day. Wild.
[laughter]
That is uh what, like a quarter of the
world's population if everybody were
having just one.
>> Isn't that crazy?
>> Definitely not evenly spread. Yes,
>> there are a lot of power users of Coke
products out there.
>> Yes, but Coca-Cola's estimate is that
there are 65 billion servings of
beverages consumed every day.
>> Does that include water or No.
>> Yeah, the human race takes 65 billion
drinks a day of something.
>> So, what's that? I guess that's eight
drinks per person per day.
>> Yes. So, you know, by that calculation,
they got a lot long way to go. Huge
market ahead of them, even if they
stayed just in beverages.
>> There you go.
>> They have 200 bottling partners around
the world with 950 unique facilities.
Pretty awesome that they don't have to
own the vast majority of that. From a
revenue perspective, this is what you
were starting to get into. And how is
the revenue breakdown? The Coca-Cola
company itself does 47 billion dollar in
revenue.
>> And how much is North America versus
rest of the world?
>> 40% of revenue is in the US and 60% is
international.
>> That's actually bigger than I would have
thought in the US.
>> Yeah. Still very meaningful.
>> I bet for the core cola products it's
less than 40% in the US.
>> Yep. I bet that's totally right. Okay.
So the interesting thing is if you start
to look at employees. So revenue $47
billion at Coca-Cola company out of $175
billion in total revenue by the system.
And this is as reported by Coca-Cola in
their proxy statement. There are 70,000
employees of Coca-Cola.
But again, if you look at the system,
there are 700,000 employees. So let's
look at those last two numbers together
because that's a 10x difference in
employee count. A full 47 of the $175
billion in revenue goes to the Coca-Cola
company, 27% of the revenue with just
10% of the total employees. I mean, the
Coca-Cola company gets a tremendous
amount of leverage out of the bottling
system. This is just employees. This
doesn't even think about the margin
profile. This doesn't think about return
on invested capital, which again is all
much better if you're the Coca-Cola
company versus if you're the bottlers.
>> Yeah. And then there's the fountain
customers, the retail partners, the
McDonald's of the world. Definitely
Coca-Cola is at a better return on
invested capital standpoint than running
restaurants.
>> The Coca-Cola company just needs to sell
syrup and spend marketing dollars to
sell the dream. It's a beautiful
position to be in.
>> Yes, it is.
>> Earnings on that $47 billion. They
generate $10.6 6 billion of net income.
The net income margins tend to average
around 23%. Gross margins average about
60%. Historically, it was as high as
70%. So almost as good as a software
business, but not quite. But for a
physical goods business, it's kind of
unbelievable that they have 60% gross
margins. Then when you look at the
revenue mix on products, this kind of
gets to like what is the company today?
69% of revenue comes from sparkling soft
drinks. So as much as they are in water
and milk and tea and juice and sports
drinks, the bulk of this business is
selling soda. 40% of all volume is
trademark Coca-Cola, which is just Coke,
Diet Coke, Coke Zero, and the like
caffeine-free and flavored variants. 47%
of the volume is the Coke family.
>> Wow. So, I I kind of continue to
maintain this mentality of they keep
trying to get into other stuff, but then
they're always a little bit like, geez,
I know we should be getting into this
other stuff, but it's not as good as our
original thing. It's not as good of a
business. It's not as unique of a brand.
And I also think they're kind of like
limping in to a lot of these other
categories. They're not making a giant
early bet on things that become the next
big beverage fad. They're trying to
watch and see how it plays out and then
jump in.
>> Yeah. Whether it's sports drinks or
energy drinks.
>> Exactly. Market cap is $300 billion. So
huge company. Not by mag 7 tech
standards, but massive, very valuable
company. You'll note, David, they did
not achieve Charlie Munger's thought
experiment of $2 trillion. And they are
very unlikely to get there by the 150th
birthday in 2036, which is the time
frame that Charlie used.
>> Indeed. growth is only 3 or 4% a year.
If you look since 1998 in the post Goa
years, it averages out to about 3 to 4%
growth. So I think fair to say anemic
when you're describing their growth in
recent years. Yeah, I think that's why
we focus the bulk of the episode on the
pre998
Coca-Cola. That's really where they
built this unbelievable thing that
frankly saturated the world.
>> Yeah. this incredible business with all
these innovations and sort of pillars of
what became one of, if not the greatest
brand in American history. But yeah, as
we said, back starting at the Pepsi
Challenge days, I think there's a strong
argument that Pepsi was the more
interesting company. And over the last
50 years, soft drinks as a category have
just gotten a lot more competitive. The
stat that I saw was back in 1948,
Coca-Cola said that they had 60% market
share of US soft drinks. 60% in postw
World War II America. In soft drinks
today, they have 21%. Pepsi has 10%. And
I think there's a lot of things in soft
drinks. So, if you just look at
carbonated, Coca-Cola does have 47%
market share and Pepsi has 19%. But in
soft drinks, I mean, the category has
just gotten a lot more competitive and
Coke has lost share. Yep.
>> All right. Should we move into analysis?
>> Yes, let's do it.
>> All right. So, instead of playbook this
time, because I had just something kind
of funny written down for Playbook,
which is this company really only does
two things. Manufacture syrup out of
some unique intellectual property that
they own and spend money on marketing.
[laughter]
[gasps]
Correct. I think the more interesting
playbook this time is a brief review of
why Coca-Cola worked.
>> Yes. Love it. Let's do it. Well, first
you were talking about it a minute ago
with the uh 64 billion daily thirst
quenching occasions around the globe.
>> Nice market to get to play in.
>> Yeah, they're just in a giant market.
Everybody in the world gets thirsty and
everybody in the world likes to have
some variety in what they drink besides
just water.
>> Yep.
>> Full stop.
>> Full stop. And in that category, they
built something that for many years, the
better part of a century, people felt
was N of one.
>> Yes,
>> they were the original. They were the
real thing. And it took a long time for
that to get eroded. And honestly, if I'm
looking at sodas, it's still the real
thing. It's just that there's a lot of
other things, too. And that's due to
both a multi-deade, hundredyear plus
investment in building the brand and
some of the greatest brand marketing of
all time.
>> Yep. Three, World War II and having a
unbelievably pathed path for them to
expand globally and then also kind of
shut the door behind them on global
expansion.
>> Yep. And I really do think continuing
the second party locally
entrepreneurallyowned
franchise bottling system
internationally was a huge contributor
to that.
>> Yeah. So much of CO's success. I mean I
keep going back to that moment earlier
where bottlers enabled them to scale so
much faster than not having bottlers.
And even if you look at all the
beautiful business dynamics of you don't
have to deal with that lower margin
stuff, you don't have to deal with the
high headcount stuff, the high
complexity stuff, the high overhead, the
lower returns on invested capital, even
if it's just about speed to market.
>> Yes.
>> They got to blanket America and then
blanket the world very quickly
>> before anyone else
>> with a thing that people pick a supplier
once. Whether the restaurant's picking
the supplier or people are picking their
favorite beverage, they pick it and then
it's over. And they sort of had this
unbelievably fast way to saturate in
something that was a race. It turned out
soft drinks were a category that was a
race. And who's going to get to global
scale first?
>> Yes. And it was all figured out by
accident [laughter] because of the worst
business deal in history.
>> As Steve Jobs always says, you can only
connect the dots looking backwards.
>> That's right. the $1 contract.
>> Of course, it is a highly addictive
substance that is also super enjoyable
to drink and triggers every reward
center you have. Not nearly as much as
when it had cocaine in it, but plenty of
reward centers from the uh bubbles, the
sugar, the caffeine, the cold
refreshment, everything about it.
>> I've been fired up doing this episode.
the exttrinsic marketing capability of
associating it with everything good in
your life, with happiness, with
Christmas, with your family, with your
favorite athletes. It's just amazing
lifestyle marketing. Yep. And then
lastly, I will say New Coke. It taught
us to love again. I mean, it made us
fall back in love with Coca-Cola. I
think Coca-Cola would be worse off today
if they didn't go through the new Coke
moment, which is crazy to say, but I
guess we don't have the counterfactual,
but if you just look at the data on the
resurgence in Coke afterwards, you
couldn't have come up with a better
marketing stunt.
>> Totally agree. I disagree with both
sides of the Don Kio statement that we
weren't that dumb and we weren't that
smart. They absolutely were that dumb
and they absolutely were that smart.
>> Yep. [laughter]
>> Yep.
>> I've got two more that I would add.
>> Great. One, I think Pepsi was great for
Coke. I think neither Pepsi nor Coke
would be what they are today or be as
great a product and company as they are
today if it weren't for the other one.
>> Definitely.
>> I mean, the Pepsi challenge is what made
Pepsi because there was a challenge to
Coke and then all of Coke's response,
they made each other better.
>> Yeah. And then the last one I would add
is that other than
software
and technology products,
this is the first real physical product
I think we've ever studied on acquired
where you can have both a low selling
price and high margins.
>> Oh, that's interesting. And that's super
important when it's also a game of scale
and global scale because it lets you
sell this affordable luxury or pause
that refreshes to everybody in the
world. More or less everybody in the
world can afford a Coca-Cola.
And also the Coca-Cola company makes
great margins on those selling prices.
It's a lot of volume. And that's
incredibly cheap ingredients. That's the
other.
>> Yes. [laughter]
>> That's our why Coke worked.
>> That's our tableau of why Coke worked so
well.
>> Yes.
>> All right. Powers
>> for new listeners to the show. And there
are many of you. Thank you so much to
all of you who shared the Trader Joe's
episode with friends and family. We saw
tens of thousands of new listeners come
and join us. So, welcome to the party.
This section power is gleefully ripped
from a book called seven powers by our
friend Hamilton Helmer. And in it he
examines what of these seven possible
powers is it that enables a business to
achieve persistent differential returns
or put another way to become more
profitable than their nearest competitor
and do so on a durable sustainable
basis. And the seven are
counterpositioning, scale economies,
switching costs, network economies,
process power, branding, and cornered
resource.
>> Well, it definitely wasn't
counterpositioning because Coke is the
real thing.
>> Was the first
>> Pepsi, master of counterpositioning.
Coke is the incumbent.
>> Yeah, Coke is mostly getting
counterpositioned.
>> Yes.
>> So, this is a business of scale
economies. Everything about this
business is scale economies. the amount
that they can amortize their advertising
over. It's just an amortization scale
economies business period. They can
manufacture and distribute things
cheaper than you can to way more people
than you can and good luck catching up.
And like they're going to have another
hundred years in them because of that
advantage that they've built up.
>> Yep. All of the things.
>> Yep.
>> And perhaps the most important might be
the first thing you said of advertising
their advertising spend over the life of
the company. they can afford to just
pour massive, massive, massive sums into
marketing. This is why it was such a big
deal when in the 70s with the Pepsi
challenge, Pepsi started outspending
Coke in marketing. If you were really
astutely paying attention to the
dynamic, that should have tipped you off
of like, oh, Coke is in big trouble
relative to Pepsi. Like, if Pepsi can
afford now to make the investment to
spend the same or more in marketing
dollars, they're going to catch up. All
right. So, while we're there, let's do
branding because I think this is so
interesting. Normally, brand power is
measured by the amount. If you provide
someone with two identical things, how
much more are they willing to pay you?
And that delta, you know, the Tiffany
over the generic piece of jewelry is how
you quantify their brand power. Coke
doesn't sell things in general that are
more expensive. Pricing power isn't
really a thing that's exercised in this
industry, if it exists at all. Coke
clearly has branding power, but rather
than taking price, they keep price low
and use their latent brand power in
other ways.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, the funny thing is when they
sell a Coke, they're selling a
billboard. And so there's this flywheel
element too where they want to sell as
much Coke as possible not just to keep
their manufacturing costs low because
it's a economies of scale thing but also
because one more Coca-Cola floating
around in the world just reinforces the
brand.
>> Yeah, I would say not that I disagree
with anything you're saying. This just
reinforces for me this business is all
about scale economies. It's all the
pursuit of scale. I think this is the
best interplay we've ever seen between
branding power and scale economies where
the way that they've built a lot of the
brand that they have is through their
scale economies and they sort of go back
and forth.
>> Yep.
>> I'll tell you, you can't measure their
brand power through how much more
expensive it is than Pepsi because that
doesn't exist. You can sure measure it
though with the outcry against New Coke.
Yes, that was a uh [laughter]
one-time experiment that most brands
never run with good reason.
>> Switching costs. I don't think I have
any real switching costs. Sometimes I do
have to drink a Diet Pepsi or a Pepsi
Max and like it's fine. It's not my
preferred drink, but it's fine.
>> Yep.
>> Network economies, none.
>> No.
>> Process power maybe, but it's hard to
discern from the outside. And then the
last one, cornered resource. Okay.
What's your opinion?
>> Of course, it's the formula. [laughter]
>> You really think? Yes.
>> But I'll tell you, it's not the formula
itself. It is all of the meaning imbued
into the formula that is actually a part
of their branding power.
>> Yeah.
>> But if Pepsi said, "We broke into the
vault and we got the Coca-Cola formula
and we're releasing something called
PepsiC." And that is identical to Coke,
something would go with it. There would
be some amount of value transferred from
Coke to Pepsi.
>> Okay. Yeah. Some
>> the public gives meaning to the formula
even if you can synthetically create
something that tastes exactly the same
as Coca-Cola.
>> Yep. Okay. So, I'm going to take the
exact opposite position on this
argument. [laughter]
>> I know you've been texting me all week
that you think that the whole secret
formula thing is a red herring.
>> Yeah. I think there is today absolutely
no value to the formula. There's a not
just a thought exercise. There's an
actual conversation in the appendix of
for God country and Coca-Cola. Mark
Pendergrass in his research found John
Peton's original formula from 1886 for
Coca-Cola. He found it and he took it to
his contacts at the Coca-Cola Company
and said, "I've got it. What do you guys
think?" And they said, "Well, okay. You
publish it. Let's say somebody gets a
hold of this formula. What are they
going to do with it? [laughter]
Make a drink. Okay, great. How are you
going to distribute it? [laughter] Okay.
Well, let's say you can figure out
distribution. Well, what are you going
to call it? Are you going to call it
Coca-Cola? Well, well, of course, we'll
sue you for that. How are you going to
brand it? How are you going to invest in
marketing? Basically, how are you going
to get the scale economies to do what we
do? And the answer is you're not going
to. And to your point about Pepsi,
>> Pepsi's got a better formula. [laughter]
>> Well, Pepsi has a better Formula One,
but there actually was a case somebody,
a former Coca-Cola employee, stole the
formula and tried to sell it to Pepsi.
This actually happened and Pepsi turned
them into the FBI. What is Pepsi going
to do with the formula? Pepsi's not
going to market the Coca-Cola formula.
These are big multinational
corporations.
>> Yep. You know, if anything, what you've
convinced me of is that the bottlers are
actually a cornered resource.
>> Those bottlers have great distribution
and they're not bottling for anyone
else.
>> Yep. Great point.
>> Coke handed them a license to print
money and they're doing it.
>> Yep.
>> I actually I'm very curious. Can you
switch teams as a bottler? Probably not.
>> And I guess it's probably legal, but I
bet nobody does.
>> Yeah. Fascinating.
>> All right. Quintessence. So listeners,
this is something we added earlier this
year where we really try to come up with
something to land the plane. What is our
takeaway from the episode? And you know,
we already laid out why did Coca-Cola
work. So this is just David and my
opportunity to kind of come up with a
quippy sentence or or three. That is the
thing that's on our mind as we're
leaving the episode. But first, David,
we have to come back to the question.
Could Coca-Cola be run by a ham
sandwich? [laughter]
>> [gasps and sighs]
>> I think after studying all this history,
I have to agree with Warren.
>> Whoa. Really? [laughter]
>> And Bill, I think it could be. Now,
there have been great, incredible CEOs
in Coca-Cola's history. Candler,
Woodruff, Gosa,
all of them have added on to what the
Coca-Cola company is, I think. But if
you took just Coca-Cola,
yeah, a ham sandwich could run it. And
in fact, it's proven by the new Coke
devacle. All right. So, I disagree. I
think there were definitely periods in
history, yes. But in 1985, no. I mean,
Coke had been losing share to Pepsi for
15 straight years. They did actually
need active management to do something.
And sort of the same thing with the
obesity crisis in the 2000s. I mean, KO
effectively bumped up against the edge
of the market of humans that it could
possibly expand to and they did actually
need a different company strategy. Now,
whether that has been executed well is a
different thing. I mean, it's only grown
3 4% over whatever the last 27 years.
So, if the criteria is run a high
growth, [snorts] successful, great place
to put money versus all the other places
you could put money company, no, they
haven't succeeded in doing that. But I
mean, you do have to do something rather
than just be flat to anemic growth or
decline.
>> Those are very fair points. Points
taken. I would still pose the question
to you. What is the single biggest
revenue driver within the Coca-Cola
company today? [laughter]
>> Trademark Coca-Cola,
>> the real thing, baby.
>> Yep. Okay. But on to quintessence. I
have two.
>> Great.
>> One is it's a system, not a company.
>> Yep. That's new for us. I know
franchises exist, but this is sort of a
different thing and I'm interested in
studying more sort of systems where it's
multiple companies interrelated. And two
is if you really boil it down, the
Coca-Cola company in a nutshell, it is
figuring out how to incentivize partners
to sell your product. And everyone is
incentivized. The bottlers are massively
incentivized. the retailers. There's
great margin there for you. The soda
fountain operators, the restaurant, the
billboard owners. We didn't talk about
this, but in the Great Depression, when
no one was buying billboard space, the
billboard owners didn't want empty,
blank, sad billboards. So, for free,
they put Coca-Cola ads up on it.
>> They were the preferred thing to a white
wall to have there. I mean just everyone
in the entire ecosystem is incentivized
to sell Coca-Cola on behalf of the
Coca-Cola company and that is durable.
Yes, Robert Woodruff had a mantra, an
official motto within the company during
his reign as company boss that everyone
who has anything to do with Coca-Cola
should make money. [laughter]
And there you go. That is a great
quintessence.
>> Yep. mind that I would add repetition
works.
>> We've studied a lot of brands on
acquired. It's become a core part of
what we do, especially with the luxury
industry. But in the luxury industry,
they're always looking for the new spin
and
changing and there are elements of
repetition. Hermes is always Hermes, but
it's always whimsical. It's always
something new. Pierre Alexi always has a
new theme every year. With Coke, it's a
story of 150 years of always delicious,
always refreshing. And yes, they change
it up, but it's the same core thing.
>> It's a core human need. You want
something delicious and refreshing no
matter who you are or when you are.
>> Yep. That's my quintessence.
>> Great.
>> All right. Well, [laughter] cheers.
>> It's a sugar water company, David. They
make a drink of sugar water that's not
good for you. And they built one of the
most incredible brands of all time,
>> but it's always delicious and always
refreshing.
>> It's not good for us. It's not good for
the planet. And it's delicious and
refreshing. [laughter]
>> Are you trying to tell me that I could
sell sugar water for the rest of my life
or I could come with you and change the
world?
>> I promise no world changing. But I do
have some trivia.
>> Great. A thing we didn't cover on the
episode. In addition to rising to the
Supreme Court and generals, soon to be
presidents, you know, helping the
success of the company, in 1980,
the government passed an amendment to
federal antitrust law that exempted the
soft drink industry. So, Coke and Pepsi
could actually grant exclusive
territories to their bottlers, which you
might have been wondering, how do you
get this local monopoly?
>> Oh, yeah. How is this legal? It's like I
get to serve all of New York and all of
New Jersey or whatever. Yeah, they
actually have a federal exemption from
antitrust law to be able to grant
monopolies.
>> Wow.
>> Trivia number two, the Hartzfield
Jackson airport in Atlanta.
>> Yep.
>> Huge airport for anyone who's ever been
there. That land was once owned by the
Coca-Cola Company. Same actually with
the Atlanta Zoo. I mean, the Coca-Cola
Company does a lot of international
business, so uh they need a big airport
there.
>> Yes, very true. And here's my last fun
piece of trivia. Around 1930, when they
were really freaked out about whether or
not they'd have the ability to import
the cocoa leaves to the United States to
do the refining here, they actually
leased a secret cocaine refining
facility in Peru.
>> Yes, in Peru.
>> They spun the factory up. It was
working. the employee manufactured
Coca-Cola there and the extracted
cocaine that came off as a byproduct.
They had a big amount of it and they
were trying to be a good employee to the
company and earn some money with it. So,
they sold 42 pounds of cocaine to a
narcotics broker in Paris and the sale
proceeds went in the Coca-Cola bank
account. And so, [laughter] there's this
crazy period where Coca-Cola's freaking
out like, "We got to hide this. This is
not good." So, this employee wasn't
trying to like steal cocaine and sell it
on the black market and make money. He
was trying to be a good employee and
increase profits for the company.
[laughter]
>> That's right. And the Hoover
administration would eventually grant
that exception so they could refine the
cocoa leaves here in the US. But, uh,
that was just before.
>> Wow. I have one piece of trivia. Do you
know what other very large American
company Coca-Cola
helped put into business and was their
>> primary and I think sole customer for
the first few years of their life?
>> No.
>> Monsanto
>> really. So Monsanto started as a
saccharine manufacturer
>> and CocaCola was their first major
customer and bought their entire
saccharine supply.
>> Was Tab saccharine sweetened?
>> No, this is way before. I think it was
just that Coca-Cola was probably
experimenting with saccharine. I don't
know that they actually used it, which
is odd. But yeah, this is right around
the turn of the century, early 1900s.
Yeah,
>> Coca-Cola
was Monsanto's very first customer.
>> We're trying to create some mind
stickers out there. [laughter]
>> Oh god.
>> All right, carveouts.
>> Great.
>> Oh boy. Well, on that um [laughter]
theme, I guess of diets, I recently
redid my home gym and I got a new piece
of workout gear that I'm really
enjoying. Have you ever heard of a ski
urg?
>> Oh, yeah. This thing is great. I am
neither a skier nor a rower, but it is a
vertical rowing machine made by Concept
2, which is the main like rowing URGK
machine manufacturer, but it's vertical.
It's attached to your wall. Uh, it takes
up no space. And the movement that you
do is like crosscountry skiing. You
reach above you, you grab the handles,
and then you pull down like you're
cross-country skiing. It's great because
my primary form of exercise these days
is running. And on my off days, I've
been looking for like, okay, I want
another thing I can do that's not my
lower body. So, I was looking at a
rowing machine, but like it takes up a
lot of space. I don't have a lot of
space down in my gym. I went with the
ski. I'm very happy with it.
>> I'm with you for multiple days uh ahead
of the Super Bowl, so I'll have to give
it a shot when I'm staying at your
house.
>> And then one more bonus carve out in my
ongoing video gaming saga with my older
daughter. I downloaded Smash Brothers
Ultimate to her Switch and so we've been
playing that. She really likes to be a
princess, of course, and to quote
unquote fight the bunny. She calls
Pikachu the bunny.
>> So, she's always like, I want to fight
the bunny. [laughter]
>> Pikachu is bouncy.
>> He kind of looks like a bunny, you know.
I get it.
>> Awesome. I've got three. Friend of the
show, Claude, for reading leases.
>> Oh, nice. I just signed a lease on
acquired north moving out of the the
basement and uh getting a studio next
year and
>> big news.
>> It didn't warrant real lawyers looking
at it. And so I gave it a pass and I I
asked Claude, "Is there anything that's
wrong in here?" And it flagged a few
things for me that I found quite
helpful. So I don't know if anyone's
told you this yet, but I think AI is the
future and it was quite helpful for me.
[laughter]
>> Do you want to sell sugar water for the
rest of your life or do you wanna
>> That's right. Two is my current favorite
running shoes are the Nike Vomero Plus,
which seems to be the replacement for my
previous favorite, the Invincible line.
So, big fan of the uh Vomero Plus. And
then the music I'm digging right now is
an artist called Armanos Gutierrez. My
good friend Andy Sparks recently stayed
at my house and put this on while we
were hanging out one morning, and it is
uh fantastic, chill music. So, I highly
recommend it.
>> Excellent. Well, with that, we've got
some thank yous for folks who helped us
with this episode. First, as always, to
Arvin Navaratnam at Worldly Partners for
his great write up on Coca-Cola, which
is linked in the show notes. And
actually, Arind was very close with
Charlie Munger when he was alive. And
so, uh, he is the one who brought up
that thought experiment that I did not
know about or I guess remember from the
first time I read Poor Charlie's
Almanac.
>> Yeah, when you brought it up, I
remembered it, but I had completely
forgotten.
>> Same. to Bill Combmes who is the past
president of the Coca-Cola Collector's
Club, the largest collector's club in
the world, but it's great. I talked to
Bill and he had all this amazing old
Coca-Cola memorabilia on the wall behind
him, drugstore signs and stuff. To
Simeon Seagull from Guggenheim Partners,
a retail and consumer brands analyst,
who helped me think through the nuances
of how brand power shows up in
financials. And of course to all the
other past Coca-Cola folks who spent
time with us helping to make sure that
we got the story right.
>> Yes. And one more big thank you from my
end to John Skully, steward of the Pepsi
Challenge.
>> That's right.
>> Thank you so much, John, for uh giving
us those wonderful stories.
>> If you like this episode, go check out
our episodes on Berkshire Hathaway,
Standard Oil, Rolex, or Trader Joe's.
And as we head into the holiday season,
feel free to share this with anyone who
wants to understand the origin behind
the modern Santa Claus. [laughter]
>> Of course,
>> after this episode, go check out ACQ2,
our other podcast feed, available in any
podcast player if you're Jones and for
more acquired. And if you're not already
on it, seriously, join our email list.
This episode was selected by folks who
are on our email list, and we can't wait
to uh ask you to vote again for episodes
in our spring season. You can join at
acquired.fm/e
and see the new overhaul that we just
did. So, each monthly email will now
have episode summaries, our big
takeaways, and exclusive photos from the
research process. Come join the Slack
acquired.fm/slack
hangout and discuss it with all the
other smart people who listen to
Acquired. And with that, listeners,
[music]
we'll see you next time.
>> We'll see you next time.
[music]
>> Is it you? Is it you? Who got the truth
now? Huh?
[music]